Political Developments 
Cultural and Religious Developments
103
5 – State and 
Society up to 
1000 CE
‘deluxe ware’ called NBPW, known for its smooth, glossy black 
surface. Archaeologically, this phase marks the emergence of a 
richer, more advanced material culture. Literary sources from this 
period also contain numerous references to expanding agricultural 
activities, increased grain output, greater crop variety—particularly 
paddy—and the use of iron implements.
Can you identify the crucial factors behind this change?
Early Kingdoms and Republics
With the passage of time, the political organisation of Vedic society 
evolved into territorial entities known as janapadas. The term 
janapada literally means where a people ( jana) first set its feet, 
indicating a transition from kinship-based identity to territorial 
identity. This transition happened between approximately 1000 BCE 
and 600 BCE. In other words, people were not only connected solely 
by kinship ties but also by a sense of belonging to a land that gave 
them a more concrete sense of identity. Some scholars have viewed 
this transition as a consolidation of identity for the Vedic janas. Thus, 
control over land, agricultural production, and trade routes became 
increasingly important, leading to the development of more complex 
administrative systems. As a result, the period approximately from 
600 BCE to 300 CE witnessed the rise of new political formations—
mentioned in the contemporary texts as the mahājanapadas (bigger 
political units than janapadas). 
Historical sources for the period usually speak of sixteen 
mahājanapadas. Among these, Magadha, located in present-day 
Bihar, gradually emerged as the most powerful. Its strategic location, 
fertile plains, and strong rulers enabled it to expand its control over 
90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10
1st century BCE: Udaygiri and Khandagiri caves, patronage of art
1st century BCE: Khāravela’s reign
300 BCE–300 CE: Sangam literature composed
300 BCE–300 CE: Early kingdoms of Tamilakam (Cheras, Cholas, and Pandyas)
Chapter 5 .indd 103 18-Jun-26 11:57:30 AM
