119
5 – State and 
Society up to 
1000 CE
Now answer the following:
1. What occupations are mentioned in the family described 
in the verse? What does this indicate about the nature of
occupations in Vedic society?
2. How does the above verse challenge the idea that social 
status and occupation were fixed by birth? 
3. What different occupations do you find in contemporary 
society?
After the discussion, compare your group’s responses with those 
of another group and note the similarities and differences in 
interpretation. Did all groups interpret the source in the same 
way? What does this tell us about how historians use evidence to 
understand the past?
The earliest reference to the four social categories, understood by 
historians as varṇa, appears in the Puruṣhasūkta, a hymn in Book 
10 of the Ṛigveda. Over a period of time, these four social categories 
(varṇas) came to be associated with specific roles and tasks. The 
brāhmaņas were mainly expected to study and teach the Vedas 
and other sacred texts, perform and officiate yajñas, and give and 
receive dāna (gifts). Rajanya (Kṣhatriyas) were tasked with warfare, 
protecting people, and administering justice. They were also expected 
to study the scriptures, sponsor yajñas, make donations, and uphold 
social order. Vaiśhyas were associated with economic activities, such 
as agriculture, pastoralism, and trade, while also participating in 
scriptural study, sacrificial rituals, and acts of charity. Śhūdras were 
expected to assist the other varṇas. However, practically, the Śhūdras
were also engaged in various economic activities such as agriculture, 
animal husbandry, trade, and arts and crafts.
Thus, the concept of varṇa was based on a system of values in 
which knowledge was given the highest status, followed by political 
power and wealth. Therefore, it is important to remember that the 
division of the four varṇas was a functional one. For instance, the 
Buddhist text Sutta Nipāta states that, “No brāhmaņa is such by birth. 
No outcaste is such by birth but only by his deeds. A brāhmaņa is 
such by his deeds.” Over time, however, this flexibility in social roles 
gradually got reduced.
Gradually, a distinct social structure called jāti emerged due 
to various factors, including intermarriage among the varṇas, 
migrating communities becoming endogamous, and territorial 
differences. While the number of varṇas was fixed at four, there 
Endogamy: 
The practice 
of marrying 
within one’s own 
social group, 
community, clan 
or tribe. It is a 
social custom 
in which people 
are expected to 
choose marriage 
partners from 
within the same 
group.
Chapter 5 .indd 119 17-Jul-26 4:45:13 PM
