120
Understanding Society: 
India and Beyond 
Grade 9 – Part 1
was no restriction on the number of jātis. As new social groups 
and occupations developed, the number of jātis continued to grow.
Social Mobility 
Varṇa and jāti were not always rigid social categories, and there 
was considerable social mobility within and across these categories. 
For example, several rulers came from diverse social backgrounds 
including the Nandas, Mauryas, Śhuṅgas, Satavāhanas, Vākāṭakas, 
Guptas, and Puṣhyabhūtis.
There are also instances of occupational mobility within social groups. 
For instance, the Mandsaur Stone Inscription (473 CE) mentions a 
guild of silk weavers who migrated from Lata in Gujarat to Dashapura 
in Madhya Pradesh during the Gupta period. This guild was proficient 
not just in weaving but also in archery, astrology, and other occupations. 
Likewise, there are several inscriptions, such as the Karitalai copper￾plate inscriptions of Mahārāja Jayanātha 
(late 5th century CE), which record 
brāhmaṇas as land managers.
Sangam literature like the Tolkappiyam
refers to four-fold division of society 
and mentions different groups such 
as Arasar (kings), Vanigar (traders/
merchants), and Velar (farmers). We also 
find references to Antanar (brāhmaṇas), 
who were often patronised by ruling 
elites and the kings. However, the 
varṇa classification mentioned in the 
Tolkappiyam seems to be premised on 
occupation, and the four-fold varṇa
classification was marked by fluidity. 
For instance, the Pattinappalai describes 
a prosperous, dynamic, trade-oriented society where different 
occupational groups such as merchants, salt-makers, fishermen, 
artisans, agriculturists, and warriors, interacted actively. This suggests 
that society was organised more on the basis of occupation and 
economic functions than on a rigid varṇa classification.
Family and Society
In Vedic society, the kula (family) formed the smallest and the most 
basic social unit. It was connected to the larger political structure 
Fig. 5.7. Karitalai copper 
plate of Mahārāja Jayanātha
Chapter 5 .indd 120 17-Jul-26 4:45:15 PM
