123
5 – State and 
Society up to 
1000 CE
Literary works of the Gupta–Vākāṭaka period (around the 4th to 
6th centuries CE) feature female characters who are depicted as 
highly educated and skilled in the arts. Other historical records 
also mention queens and royal women who played important roles 
in governance and religious patronage. For example, as discussed 
in the Grade 7, Part I textbook, Prabhāvatī Gupta, daughter of the 
Gupta ruler Chandragupta II, ruled as a regent in the Vākāṭaka 
kingdom and issued land grants in her own name. Women 
also appear as donors on several votive inscriptions from the 
post-Maurya period. 
Sangam literature similarly portrays women as active participants 
in society and the economy. They performed important agrarian
tasks such as planting, weeding, husking, winnowing paddy, and 
were also involved in cattle rearing, spinning, fishing, salt production, 
and garland selling. Sangam texts further mention influential women 
such as the celebrated poetesses Avvaiyar and Vennikuyattiyar 
(woman potter). Similarly the women bards and dancers quite like 
their male counterparts contributed to the cultural, literary, and 
social roles of women in early historic southern India. Later, during 
the Chola period, inscriptions record the activities of royal women 
such as Sembiyan Mahādevī, who supported temple building and 
religious institutions.
Religious Life and the Emergence of Bhakti
The Vedic pantheon did not follow a rigid hierarchical structure, and 
different deities are praised as supreme in different hymns of the 
Vedas. These deities were invoked through prayers and sacrificial 
rituals (yajñas), which involved making offerings, most often to 
the sacred fire. The faith of the Vedic people was intertwined with 
the worship of nature, as each Vedic deity was associated with an 
element of nature, such as the sun, rain, fire, earth, dawn, etc. Some 
of these ancient practices continue today in the form of festivals 
celebrated across India, for example, the sun worship during Chhath 
and on Makar Sankranti. Such practices are often understood in the 
context of early societies’ dependence on nature for survival. As a 
result, nature was viewed not merely as a resource, but as sacred 
and powerful. The Vedic worldview, therefore, reflected an early 
sense of respect for, and responsibility towards, nature.
Votive 
inscription:
Text engraved 
on stone, 
metal, or other 
materials, 
dedicating a 
gift, sculpture, 
or structure 
to a deity or 
sacred place. 
Chapter 5 .indd 123 18-Jun-26 11:58:59 AM
