124
Understanding Society: 
India and Beyond 
Grade 9 – Part 1
DON’T MISS OUT 
Around the middle of the first millennium BCE, a discernible 
trend of renunciants emerged. These individuals advocated non￾attachment to material comforts and social relationships, choosing 
to live as ascetics and wanderers, rather than as householders. 
Contemporary sources refer to them by different terms, such as 
parivrājaka (wanderer), bhikṣhu (one who lives by begging alms), 
or śhramaṇa (one who strives). While Gautama Buddha and 
Mahāvīra emerged as influential thinkers of this period, the idea 
of renunciation was already present in the Vedic tradition. As 
discussed earlier, amongst the four stages (āśhrama) of life,
vānaprastha and saṁnyāsa clearly have a renunciatory 
connotation.
Over time, the Vedic religious tradition evolved towards forms 
of worship centred on personal deities such as Viṣhṇu, Śhiva, and 
Śhakti, laying the foundations for later devotional practices. One 
such practice was ‘Bhakti’, a path that offered a direct connection 
with the gods without the need for elaborate rituals prescribed in the 
Vedas, and which was accessible to all, regardless of class or gender.
Bhakti has a long tradition in India, with early references found 
in texts such as the Mahābhārata. However, the organised and 
widespread devotional set of practices known as the Bhakti tradition 
gained prominence in the 6th century Tamil region through the 
devotional activities of the Āḻvārs and Nāyanmārs. The Āḻvārs were 
twelve saint-poets who composed hymns in praise of Lord Viṣhṇu. 
Alongside the Āḻvārs were the sixty-three Nāyanmārs, the Śhaiva 
saint-poets, who composed hymns in praise of Lord Śhiva. Together, 
the Āḻvārs and Nāyanmārs created a large body of Tamil Bhakti 
literature, which represents one of the most significant cultural and 
religious developments of this period. You will learn more about the 
Bhakti tradition in the second part of the Grade 9 textbook.
The Quest for Knowledge
In early India, education was an integral part of life, serving a
holistic purpose. Truth, patience, regularity, humility, control of 
senses, purity of self (sattvaśhuddhi), cognition of the underlying 
unity of life, nature and environment, and reverence for all beings 
were the inner values cultivated by Indian education. Pupils were 
trained to live in accordance with dharma—the guiding principle for 
Chapter 5 .indd 124 18-Jun-26 11:59:00 AM
