129
5 – State and 
Society up to 
1000 CE
that earlier in this chapter, we discussed the Junagadh inscription of 
Rudradaman I (see Fig. 5.5). This inscription records that Puṣhyagupta, 
a governor appointed by Chandragupta Maurya, constructed a dam 
on Sudarshana Lake near Girnar in Saurāṣhṭra (or the Kathiawad 
region in Gujarat). This inscription highlights the active role of the 
Mauryan state in developing irrigation infrastructure. Facilitation 
of agriculture continued to be a major preoccupation of the state 
because it was one of the major sources of revenue.
LET’S RECALL
The Cholas were builders of irrigation systems that included 
canals, lakes, and tanks with connecting channels. Do you 
remember reading in your previous grades about the Grand Anicut 
(Kallanai) built by Karikala Chola? Such irrigation structures 
helped store and distribute water, supported agriculture, and 
encouraged the growth of settlements. The Grand Anicut continued 
to be used and repaired by later rulers and administrations over 
many centuries, showing the lasting importance of irrigation works 
undertaken by Cholas. Remarkably, it remains in use even today.
THINK ABOUT IT
Why do you think irrigational structures like dams and canals were 
considered so important that their construction was recorded in 
inscriptions?
Trade: Trade Routes and Ports
One of the most significant features of economic development during 
this period was the expansion of trade and commerce. The emergence 
of well-structured states provided the necessary infrastructure and 
conditions for trade to flourish. The Arthaśhāstra identifies trade as 
one of the major economic activities and notes that Magadha traded 
textiles, gems, coral, pearls, metals, and minerals with various parts 
of northern, central, and southern India. Salt was another important 
commodity, and its production was strictly regulated by the state. 
The state also ensured the safety of trade routes and took measures 
to prevent the adulteration of goods and protect consumers from 
unfair practices. As we learnt in previous grades, trade networks 
within the Indian subcontinent, as well as those extending beyond 
it, had been developing since the times of the Harappans. By around 
the 6th century BCE, two major land routes—Dakṣhiṇāpatha and 
Chapter 5 .indd 129 18-Jun-26 11:59:14 AM
