131
5 – State and 
Society up to 
1000 CE
Uttarāpatha—had emerged and were later maintained and expanded 
by successive dynasties. Over time, these routes served as important 
trans-regional networks, linking different parts of the subcontinent. 
They facilitated the movement of goods, people, and ideas, connecting 
inland regions with coastal ports and thereby integrating overland 
and maritime trade systems.
Indian ports also played a significant role in facilitating trade and 
commerce, attracting both Indian and foreign traders. Trade links 
between the Harappans and the Mesopotamians already existed, 
involving ports along the western coast of India, the Persian Gulf, and 
other regions. Over time, these networks expanded as major ports 
such as Muziris, Kāveripaṭṭinam, Arikameḍu, and Masulipaṭnam, 
developed and grew. [Note: Some of these ports have been marked on 
the map (Fig. 5.12) to help you locate them geographically.] Maritime 
trade utilised both coastal routes and long-distance overseas routes 
across the Indian Ocean. By the early centuries of the Common Era, 
India’s trade with Rome had expanded significantly, conducted 
through both sea routes and overland connections via Central Asia. 
We will learn more about India’s trade interactions with different 
regions in a chapter titled ‘India and the World – 1’ in part 2 of 
this textbook.
LET’S RECALL
In previous grades, we studied the Silappadikāram, which mentions 
two important routes in the Tamil region that also extended into 
northern India. The first route linked Kanchipuram to the famous 
port of Poompuhar (Kaveripattinam), and the second connected 
Kanchipuram to Kanyakumari.
Guilds
The early Indian economy was supported by collective organisations 
of traders, artisans, and merchants known as guilds (śhreṇīs), which 
were associations of people engaged in the same profession, craft, or 
occupation. These guilds played a significant role in the expansion of 
trade and commerce, especially after the rise of territorial states in the 
form of the mahājanapadas (6th century BCE). Metallic coins, beginning 
with silver punch-marked coins, also came into circulation during 
this period. The Jātaka literature refers to eighteen types of guilds, 
indicating that they were well-established and influential institutions 
in the economic life of early India. Guilds regulated the quality of 
goods and often fixed prices to protect both artisans and consumers. 
Chapter 5 .indd 131 18-Jun-26 11:59:18 AM
