133
5 – State and 
Society up to 
1000 CE
DON’T MISS OUT
An inscription on the southern gateway of the Great Stupa at 
Sanchi refers to the benevolent and welfare activities carried out 
by the guild of ivory workers from Vidiśhā. These ivory workers 
were responsible for carving the stone sculptures on the gateways 
and railings surrounding the stūpa, indicating the active role of 
craft guilds in both artistic production and religious patronage.
In this chapter, we explored the foundations of state and society in 
early India, while tracing the development of political institutions, 
social structures, economic life, and cultural traditions. From 
the culture of the Vedic period to the robust administration of 
vast empires, social and political ideas evolved over time while 
maintaining a remarkable continuity. The chapter also highlighted 
the dynamic nature of early Indian society and its intellectual and 
cultural achievements. On the whole, the developments of this period 
laid the groundwork for many enduring traditions that continue to 
shape the Indian subcontinent’s social and cultural life even today.
Before we move on...
Æ Indian civilisation demonstrates a remarkable continuity in its
cultural, social, and political traditions.
Æ The structures of social, cultural, and political life in India
evolved from Vedic period and took various forms across space 
and time.
Æ The rise of powerful states such as Magadha and empires like 
the Mauryas and Guptas led to the emergence of structured 
systems of administration, taxation, military organisation, and 
governance.
Æ Early political organisation evolved from clans (janas) led by 
a rājā to larger kingdoms and republics (gaṇas or saṁghas) 
and later to powerful empires such as the Mauryas, Guptas, 
and Cholas. The economy was largely based on agriculture, 
supported by irrigation works, while trade networks, ports, and 
guilds played a vital role in the growth of commerce and crafts. 
Despite political changes, knowledge traditions, trade networks, 
cultural, and devotional practices such as Bhakti continued to 
flourish across regions.
Chapter 5 .indd 133 18-Jun-26 11:59:23 AM
