Exploring Mixtures and their Separation 73
5.1 How Can We Classify Mixtures?
You have learnt that a mixture of sugar and 
water has a uniform composition throughout. 
A well-stirred mixture of sugar and water 
is equally sweet in the first and the last sip. Such a 
mixture is called a homogeneous mixture (Fig. 5.1) or 
a solution. Other examples of homogeneous mixtures 
are vinegar (acetic acid in water), aerated drinks like 
soda (carbon dioxide in water), etc. A solution always 
remains homogeneous.
On the other hand, a stirred mixture of sand and water 
is not uniform. The sand particles are easily visible in 
the water and settle with time. Such a mixture is called a 
heterogeneous mixture (Fig. 5.2). Is the mixture of oil and 
water homogeneous or heterogeneous? Can you think of 
some other heterogeneous mixtures?
Activity 5.1: Let us experiment — Group activity 
Divide the class into three groups — A, B and C. Each group 
prepares a mixture in a colourless, transparent glass 
tumbler or a 100 mL beaker by following these steps: 
1. Group A: Add one spatula of common salt to 50 mL of 
water in a beaker and stir it well. 
Label it A. 
2. Group B: Add one spatula of chalk 
powder to 50 mL of water in a 
beaker and stir it well. Label it B.
3. Group C: Add a few drops of milk to 
50 mL of water in a beaker and stir 
it well. Label it C.
4. Are the particles visible in 
each mixture? Record your 
observations. 
5. Direct the light from a laser 
pointer through the beakers 
containing the mixtures (Fig. 5.3)
and observe it from the side 
of the beaker in a direction 
perpendicular to the laser beam. 
Record your observations. 
Safety first: Do not look directly into the 
laser beam. It can cause irreversible eye 
damage.
6. Predict what you would observe 
in each of the beakers if you 
leave them undisturbed for a few 
minutes.
Fig. 5.1: Homogeneous mixture
Fig. 5.2: Heterogeneous mixture
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 9
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5.3: Passing laser light through various mixtures (a) salt 
and water, (b) chalk powder and water, and (c) milk and water
A
B
C
Chapter-05.indd 73 04-05-2026 14:36:55
