74 Exploration|Grade 9
7. Set up a filtration apparatus and filter each mixture separately. Is 
there any residue left on the filter paper?
8. Based on your observations, do you think these are the same types of 
mixtures or are they different?
These are indeed different types of mixtures. How? Let us explore 
further!
5.2 Solutions 
You have learnt that solutions are homogeneous mixtures. You have also 
learnt that solutions are prepared when a solute (the substance that gets 
dissolved) is mixed with a solvent (the substance that dissolves the solute). 
In the mixture of sugar and water, sugar is the solute, and water is the 
solvent. In what proportion are a solute and a solvent present in a solution? 
Can these be expressed quantitatively?
5.2.1 Concentration of a solution 
You have learnt how Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS) is prepared. We add 
specified amounts of salt and sugar to a fixed amount of water to prepare 
ORS. If we change the amount of salt or sugar added to the same volume 
of water, or change the volume of water for the specified amounts of salt 
and sugar, we will get a solution of salt and sugar in water, but that will 
not be ORS. In other words, we cannot freely add any amount of salt and 
sugar to a fixed amount of water to make ORS.
Let us take another example. When farmers spray pesticides on their 
crops, they must mix the right amount of pesticide with a fixed amount of 
water to prepare a solution. If they do not do so, what is likely to happen? 
Too little pesticide may not protect crops, while too much can damage 
crops, soil and the environment.
Can you think of other such examples?
The right proportion is always essential when preparing a 
solution.
The amount of solute dissolved in a given amount of 
solvent or solution is termed as the concentration of the 
solution. 
Understanding concentration is essential not only in science 
laboratories but also in everyday life, whether in medicine, 
agriculture, food, cosmetics, or even while making a simple 
cup of tea!
5.2.2 How do we express concentration?
Let us now explore the different ways to express the 
concentration of a solution, and understand where and why 
each method is more suitable.
Collect some commercial packaged products (Fig. 5.4) and 
note down the information given for each item.
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 6
Note
Not all sugary 
drinks prepared 
at home or sold 
in the market 
are ORS.
Dilip 
Mahalanabis, 
an Indian 
paediatrician, 
first 
developed 
and 
implemented the treatment 
for dehydration caused 
by diseases, such as 
diarrhoea and cholera. He 
formulated the ORS that has 
revolutionised rehydration 
therapy. It has saved millions 
of lives after the World 
Health Organization (WHO) 
popularised it worldwide.
Meet a Scientist
Chapter-05.indd 74 28-04-2026 15:28:52
