Exploring Mixtures and their Separation 79
You may also try:
1. Place 1 – 2 mL of the saturated copper sulfate solution on a small glass 
plate or a lamination sheet.
2. Leave it for some time. What do you observe? 
Did you get crystals? If yes, is this a good way to experiment? Explain. 
Crystallization is a common technique for separating pure substances 
(crystals) from homogeneous mixtures. When new compounds are prepared, 
they are often accompanied by unwanted impurities. Crystallization helps 
to separate the desired pure substance from the undesired impurities.
If a hot, saturated solution of copper sulfate is cooled rapidly in ice-cold water, smaller and less 
well-formed crystals will form than if it is cooled slowly at room temperature. How would you 
design and perform an experiment to test this hypothesis?
Hint: Prepare a hot saturated solution of copper sulfate and divide it into two equal parts. 
Think as a Scientist
4. Refer to the solubility curves given in Activity 5.2. If equal masses of hot, saturated solutions 
of compounds ‘A’ and ‘B’ are cooled from 80 °C to 60 °C, which solution is likely to deposit 
more solid? 
5. Will there be any change in the size of common salt crystals if the rate of evaporation is 
increased or decreased? Explain.
Pause and Ponder
Activity 5.4: Let us describe a process
Observe Fig. 5.9, it shows how salt crystals are obtained from seawater. 
Can you describe the process in your own words?
Seawater Saturated 
solution Salt crystals
Fig. 5.9: Steps followed in the salt manufacturing process 
Ready to Go Beyond 
(a) (b)
Have you visited a place where large 
crystal deposits can be observed in nature? 
Such crystals can be found in various 
locations, including mines, caves and even 
within the Earth’s crust. One such example 
is the Mawsmai Cave (Fig. 5.10a) in Sohra 
(Cherrapunji), known for its fascinating 
natural formations. Quartz (Fig. 5.10b) is 
also one of the beautiful crystals found in 
nature.
Fig. 5.10: Naturally occurring crystals (a) in caves and (b) quartz
Chapter-05.indd 79 03-04-2026 19:58:09
