Exploring Mixtures and their Separation 81
A mixture of acetone and water can be separated by distillation because 
their boiling points differ sufficiently. Acetone boils at about 56 °C and 
water boils at 100 °C. A large difference in boiling points allows one liquid 
to vaporise before the vapours of the other liquid are formed in significant 
amount. 
The process of distillation has been used for a long time for 
various purposes, including extraction of fragrances from 
flowers to make perfumes.
You must have noticed the pleasant earthy smell that 
rises from the ground after the first rain. In Kannauj, a 
town in Uttar Pradesh known as the perfume capital of 
India, this beautiful fragrance is captured and turned into 
a natural perfume called Mitti ka Ittar (earthy fragrance). 
This perfume is made using a traditional distillation method 
known as the Deg-Bhapka method (Fig. 5.13), which has 
been passed down through generations in Kannauj. It is 
in great demand, both in India and around the world. The 
Fragrance and Flavour Development Centre in Kannauj 
has facilities for separating flavour and fragrance components from flowers, leaves and other parts 
of plants. It also supports farmers in cultivating fragrance-producing plants and offers expertise to 
those looking to establish their own perfume businesses.
India’s Scientific Contributions
Fig. 5.13: Deg-Bhapka method
Ready to Go Beyond
Fig. 5.14: (a) Petroleum refinery, and (b) products of fractional distillation of crude petroleum 
(a)
A petroleum refinery (Fig. 5.14a) is an industrial unit where crude oil is processed to obtain 
various useful petroleum products. Petroleum products are mixtures of useful gases and liquids, 
such as petroleum gas, petrol, kerosene, diesel, etc. Crude 
petroleum is extracted from the Earth’s crust and separated 
into these different fractions using the process of fractional 
distillation (Fig. 5.14b). Fractional distillation is the process 
of separating components of a mixture with relatively 
small differences (less than 25 °C) in their boiling points. 
The gaseous fraction is filled in steel cylinders under high 
pressure, where it gets liquefied. It is used as domestic fuel 
in the form of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG).
(b)
Bitumen
Diesel
Petrol
Petroleum gas
Lubricating oil
Aviation fuel 
(Kerosene)
Furnace
Crude 
oil
Chapter-05.indd 81 04-05-2026 14:37:11
