82 Exploration|Grade 9
5.3.3 Paper Chromatography
Have you ever observed what happens when a drop of water 
falls on something written with a sketch pen on a paper? You 
may have noticed that the colour spreads. If the sketch pen is 
black, different colours might spread out. If you have not noticed 
this before, try it now!
Activity 5.5: Let us investigate
1. Take a 3 cm wide strip of chromatographic paper and draw 
a straight, horizontal line, 2 cm from the bottom of the 
paper with a pencil (Fig. 5.15a). Alternatively, you can use a 
strip of filter paper.
2. Mark a spot with a black sketch pen at the centre of the line 
(Fig. 5.15b). 
3. Take enough water to make a thin 
layer at the bottom of a gas jar, a 
measuring cylinder, or a beaker.
4. Place the paper strip with the ink 
spot vertically into the container, 
so that its lower end dips into the 
water. The water level should 
be below the spot, as shown in 
Fig. 5.15c.
5. Observe the paper as the water rises 
through the paper. What do you 
notice?
6. As the water rises, the ink starts to 
separate into different colour spots. 
What can you infer from this? 
This method of separating the components of a mixture is known as 
paper chromatography. It uses differences in the interactions of the 
components with the solvent and the paper to separate them. The liquid 
carries the substances up the paper, separating them based on how fast 
they move. You can also try this with green food colour instead of black ink 
and use a 2 % m/v salt solution as the solvent.
Similarly, you can separate different pigments present in the green 
extract of spinach leaves or coloured pigments from the flower petals. Will 
water work as a solvent in every case? In some cases, you may need to use 
a different solvent, such as alcohol or a mixture of solvents.
6. State whether the following statements are True or False. Also, correct the False statements.
(i) Salt can be separated from a salt solution by evaporation or distillation.
(ii) Distillation can be used for separation of two liquids even when these have the same 
boiling point.
(iii) In paper chromatography, the solvent level should be above the sample spot at the 
beginning of the experiment.
(iv) Evaporation and crystallization are the same processes.
Pause and Ponder
Threads of 
Curiosity
The word ‘chromatography’ 
comes from the Greek 
words chroma, meaning 
‘colour’ and graphein, 
meaning ‘to write’. It 
actually means ‘writing 
with colour’ because it 
was first used to separate 
coloured substances like 
dyes and inks.
Fig. 5.15: Paper chromatography
(a) (c)
Chromatographic
paper
Line drawn 
with pencil
Watch 
glass
Gas jar
Water
(b)
Ink 
spot
Chapter-05.indd 82 03-04-2026 19:58:17
