Exploring Mixtures and their Separation 83
5.4 How Can We Separate the Components of 
Heterogeneous Mixtures?
5.4.1 Separation of two immiscible liquids
You have learnt about non-uniform mixtures. Have you noticed what 
happens when water falls into a container that has oil? The oil and water 
form separate layers. They do not mix and are called immiscible liquids. 
Similarly, sand and water do not mix, nor do iron filings and sulfur. These 
are examples of heterogeneous mixtures.
How can you separate the components of a mixture of two immiscible 
liquids? 
Let us try to separate mustard oil from water. 
Activity 5.6: Let us separate
1. Pour a mixture of 5 mL mustard oil and 
20 mL water into a 50 mL separating 
funnel. 
2. Let it stand undisturbed. What do you 
observe?
3. You will see the formation of two separate 
layers of mustard oil and water (Fig. 5.16). 
The yellow-coloured mustard oil forms the 
upper layer and water forms the lower 
layer. Can you explain why?
4. Open the stopcock of the separating funnel 
slowly to collect the lower layer of water 
carefully into a container.
5. Close the stopcock when the water is almost 
fully drained.
6. Collect the next small portion that may 
contain both liquids and discard it.
7. Collect the layer of oil separately by opening the stopcock again.
You now have two separate liquids.
Can you think of any heterogeneous mixtures with a gas as 
one of the components? 
Gas particles are free to move in all directions, so they mix 
easily and uniformly with other gases. Hence, most mixtures of 
gases are homogeneous, such as a mixture of hydrogen and 
oxygen, which is used as a rocket fuel. On the other hand, smoke 
(solid particles suspended in air), fog (tiny liquid water droplets 
present in air) and dust in the air are some heterogeneous 
mixtures with gas as one of the components.
Most of the solid-solid mixtures are heterogeneous. You 
can use a property of one of the solids to separate the mixture. 
You have learnt how to separate iron nails from sawdust 
using a magnet. Now, let us explore another technique to 
separate solid-solid mixtures.
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Separating funnel
Water
Conical flask
Mustard oil
Fig. 5.16: Separation of immiscible liquids
Laboratory stand
Glass stopper
Stopcock
What if …
two immiscible liquids 
of the same density are 
mixed in a separating 
funnel, how will the 
layers form?
Chapter-05.indd 83 28-04-2026 15:29:48
