84 Exploration|Grade 9
5.4.2 Sublimation 
Activity 5.7: Let us explore
1. Take a spatula full of the mixture containing crushed camphor and 
sand. Put it into a clean and dry china dish. Place it on the tripod stand 
using a wire gauze.
2. Take a clean and dry glass funnel. Plug its 
nozzle with cotton.
3. Keep this funnel inverted on the china dish 
and set up the apparatus as shown in Fig. 5.17. 
4. Light the burner and place it under the wire 
gauze.
5. Heat the china dish gently for a few minutes.
6. Observe the inner wall of the funnel carefully. 
Do you notice any solid deposits?
7. You may find white, solid camphor deposits 
on the inner wall of the funnel while sand 
remains in the china dish. 
Camphor, on heating (below its melting point), 
changes directly from the solid state to the vapour 
state without passing through the liquid state, this 
process is called sublimation. On cooling, vapours 
condense back into a solid without becoming a 
liquid, this is called deposition. Hence, camphor sublimes and separates 
from sand because sand does not sublime on heating. 
You can also perform this activity using any other sublimable substance, 
such as naphthalene, in place of camphor. 
Similarly, solid carbon dioxide, known as dry ice which is used for ice 
cream storage, also undergoes sublimation. Can you think of any other 
mixtures where sublimation can be used to separate the components?
Is it possible to dissolve one metal in another?
Metals do not dissolve into each other at room temperature. However, 
when metals are melted at high temperatures, they can be mixed to form a 
solution. When such a hot mixture of two or more metals cools, it solidifies 
into a new material that appears to be a single metal. A homogeneous 
mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a non-metal, is called an 
alloy. Physical methods cannot separate the components of an alloy. Alloys 
are generally prepared to produce materials that are stronger, 
more rigid, or more corrosion-resistant. Common examples 
of alloys include brass — a mixture of approximately 80% 
copper and 20% zinc; bronze — a mixture of approximately 
80% copper and 20% tin; stainless steel — usually a mixture 
of iron and other elements, such as carbon (about 0.03 – 0.8%), 
chromium (16 – 18%), nickel (10.0 –14.0%) and molybdenum 
(2.0 – 3.0%).
Cotton plug
Glass funnel
China dish containing 
mixture of camphor and 
sand
Wire gauze
Tripod stand
Burner
Fig. 5.17: Sublimation of camphor
Pause and Ponder
7. Why do immiscible liquids 
form two separate layers 
in a separating funnel?
8. Is sublimation different 
from evaporation? Justify.
Chapter-05.indd 84 28-04-2026 15:31:06
