Exploring Mixtures and their Separation 85
5.4.3 Suspensions
Let us look closely at the container shown in Fig. 5.2. No matter how well 
you stir, the sand particles can be seen clearly, unlike in a solution, where 
the solute particles are not visible. Such heterogeneous mixtures in which 
the solid particles (sand) do not dissolve but remain suspended throughout 
the bulk of the medium (water) are called suspensions. In the case of a 
suspension, the particles of the undissolved substance are larger in size 
than the particles present in the solution. Particles of a suspension are 
visible to the naked eye. Some other examples of suspension are sawdust 
suspended in water and tea leaves in water.
How can we separate mud from water?
If you leave a container of muddy water undisturbed, the heavier mud 
particles settle at the bottom and the water may still appear cloudy. You can 
filter the muddy water through a cotton cloth or filter paper. While some 
larger particles will be removed, the water often remains cloudy. This shows 
that filtration is not always enough to separate tiny particles. If the muddy 
water is still not clear even after keeping for some time, how can it be cleaned? 
In such cases, we use techniques, such as centrifugation and/or coagulation. 
Let us explore these processes!
A. Centrifugation
Let us understand this by playing a game. Choose a partner. 
Then, cross your arms and hold each other’s hands as shown 
in Fig. 5.18. Now spin around together. Do you feel as if you 
are being pulled outwards? A similar force helps to separate 
a mixture in a tube by centrifugation. This process involves 
spinning a mixture in a tube at a high speed (Fig. 5.19). During 
centrifugation, the tubes become horizontal and the centrifugal 
force (outward force acting on a body moving in circular 
motion) causes the heavier particles to move outwards, where 
they settle at the bottom of the tube, while the lighter liquid 
remains at the top.
Fig. 5.19: Centrifugation machine (a) outer view and (b) inner view
(a) (b)
Centrifugation is widely used in laboratories to separate the 
components of blood, such as red blood cells and plasma, and in many 
chemical industries.
Threads of 
Curiosity
The spinning game is a folk 
dance called phugadi in 
Marathi and kikli in Punjabi. 
What is this called in your 
local language?
Fig. 5.18: A spinning game 
Chapter-05.indd 85 28-04-2026 15:33:02
