86 Exploration|Grade 9
The Paperfuge
Centrifugation is usually done using an electric 
machine but by applying ideas from a common 
toy, a simple hand-powered device called a 
paperfuge (Fig. 5.20) can perform the same process 
without electricity. By spinning the blood samples 
at a very high speed, the paperfuge separates 
heavier components from lighter ones, just like 
a laboratory centrifuge. This low-cost tool can 
help detect diseases like malaria and anaemia in 
remote areas. Find out more about such simple 
technological inventions that improve access to 
medical care in remote places.
Bridging Science and Society
Tape
 Fig. 5.20: Paperfuge 
Blood sample
String
Handle
Cardboard disc
Activity 5.8: Let us make a model
Make your own centrifuge with a cardboard 
disc and thick thread. You will be able to see 
how the heavier particles move outwards. It 
is a fun and hands-on way to understand the 
science behind separation. Which mixture 
would you like to separate using this mini 
centrifuge?
B. Coagulation
Powdered alum (fitkari) can be added to a 
beaker containing muddy water (Fig. 5.21a). 
Alum is a white crystalline chemical 
substance often used in water purification. 
The alum causes the fine suspended 
particles to clump together. This process 
is called coagulation and the alum is said 
to act as a coagulant (Fig. 5.21b). These 
larger clumps thus formed, settle by gravity 
(sedimentation), as shown in Fig. 5.21c and 
can be separated from water by decantation 
or filtration.
Can you think of any other coagulation 
processes used in everyday life?
The formation of cheese (paneer) from milk also involves coagulation, 
in which acid (lemon juice or vinegar) is used as a coagulant. It causes the 
coagulation of milk proteins, forming cheese.
5.4.4 Colloids
If the components of blood can be separated by centrifugation and the 
blood coagulates, is it a suspension? However, we cannot see blood cells 
with the naked eye. Is it a solution?
Blood is neither a solution nor a true suspension. It is a colloid. Some 
other examples of colloids are milk, tomato sauce and ice cream.
Fig. 5.21: Process of coagulation
(c) Impurities settle at the bottom
(a) Adding powdered 
alum to suspended 
impurities in water
Powdered 
alum
(b) Alum coagulates 
the suspended 
impurities
Muddy 
water
Settled impurities 
Chapter-05.indd 86 03-04-2026 19:58:26
