Exploring Mixtures and their Separation 87
Donate Blood 
Bridging Science and Society
Plasma
Platelets and 
white blood cells
Blood sample
Test tube stand
Fig. 5.22: Components of blood (a) before 
centrifugation and (b) after centrifugation 
Red blood cells
Donating blood saves lives. People in emergencies, 
during surgeries, or with serious illnesses may need a 
blood transfusion, which is the transfer of blood from a 
healthy person to a patient.
Donated blood is tested and when the blood group 
is identified, it is separated into its components, such as 
plasma, platelets, white and red blood cells (Fig. 5.22). 
These are stored safely in blood banks and supplied 
when required. In Chapter 3, Tissues in Action, you 
have learnt that blood connects different parts of the 
body by transporting nutrients, gases and hormones.
The body replaces the donated blood naturally 
within a few weeks, making blood donation safe and 
helpful.
Do you know your blood group? Find out!
(a)
(b)
Let us try to understand what colloids are. 
How are they different from solutions and 
suspensions? Can you think of some other 
substances that could be colloids?
Solutions, suspensions and colloids 
(Fig. 5.23) differ mainly in the size of the 
dissolved or the suspended particles. The 
particle size of a solute is the smallest (less 
than 1 nm diameter) in a solution. Colloids 
have larger particles (1 – 1000 nm), while 
suspensions have much larger particles (more 
than 1000 nm in diameter). 
Unlike suspension, the particles in a colloid do not settle over time from 
the mixture. They are uniformly dispersed throughout the mixture as in 
a solution. 
5.5 Tyndall Effect
Let us go back to Activity 5.1. What happened to the thin beam of laser 
light when it was passed through the beakers containing the mixtures? 
You might have observed that the path of the light beam was not visible 
in solution A. The particles in suspension B scattered (spread) the beam 
of light making its path visible. In mixture C too, the path of light was 
visible, indicating that the particles scattered the light, though the mixture 
appeared homogeneous. 
Have you ever observed light scattering by particles in your 
surroundings? The scattering of light by particles is known as the Tyndall 
effect. It is called so because it was first explained by the scientist John 
Tyndall, who studied the scattering of light by particles.
This effect can also be observed when a fine beam of light enters a dark 
room through a small hole. This happens because light gets scattered by 
Fig. 5.23: (a) Solution, (b) suspension, and (c) colloid
(a) (b) (c)
Chapter-05.indd 87 28-04-2026 15:35:48
