88 Exploration|Grade 9
the dust and smoke particles in the air. You might have also 
observed this phenomenon in the floodlights in a sports 
stadium (Fig. 5.24). Think of some more examples!
Scattering of light occurs when it passes through a 
colloid or a suspension but not when it passes through a 
transparent solution.
The components of a colloid are called the dispersed 
phase and the dispersion medium. The solute-like component 
or the dispersed particles, in a colloid form the dispersed 
phase and the component in which the dispersed phase is 
suspended is known as the dispersion medium.
Some common colloids we encounter in our daily lives have both the dispersed phase and the 
dispersion medium as liquids. These are called emulsions. Emulsions containing oil and water are 
further classified as oil-in-water or water-in-oil, depending on the nature of the dispersed phase 
and the dispersion medium. Milk and vanishing creams are common examples of oil-in-water 
emulsions, whereas butter, body lotions, cold cream, etc., are examples of water-in-oil emulsions. 
Some medicines are prepared as emulsions to disperse them in water and make them easily 
palatable. This also reduces the greasy feeling of the liquid medicine.
The presence of emulsifying agents stabilises emulsions. For example, proteins in milk and 
butter act as emulsifying agents. 
You can make an emulsion by thoroughly mixing and shaking a few drops of cooking oil with 
water containing a few drops of soap solution. 
Threads of Curiosity
9. Clouds are made up of tiny water droplets or ice crystals floating in the air. Based on what you 
know about solutions, suspensions and colloids, what type of mixture do you think clouds are 
and why?
10. Why do cities with a lot of smoke and dust in the air often look hazy?
Pause and Ponder
Activity 5.9: Complete Table 5.1 and review what you have learnt about 
solutions, suspensions and colloids.
Table 5.1: Properties of different types of mixtures
S. No. Property Solution Suspension Colloid
1. Nature (homogeneous/heterogeneous)
2. Particle size
3. Visibility
4. Separation by filtration
5. Settling
6. Tyndall effect
Fig. 5.24: Demonstration of Tyndall effect in 
a sports stadium
Chapter-05.indd 88 03-04-2026 19:58:29
