Exploring Mixtures and their Separation 89
We use various properties, such as size, density and solubility to separate 
mixtures. However, separation is not always simple. Imagine trying to 
separate all the ingredients in a lemonade once they have been mixed. Can 
you do it? 
Do you know that separation happens in nature and in our bodies, 
too? For example, our kidneys remove waste from our blood. Today, we 
face bigger challenges like cleaning oceans and rivers by removing plastic 
waste. It is also essential to treat sewage water before releasing it into the 
environment. Sewage treatment involves steps, such as sedimentation, 
coagulation and filtration. Clean water obtained in this way can be reused 
for flushing toilets or watering plants.
Another important task is sorting or segregating the waste at home. Dry 
waste, such as plastic, paper, glass and metal can be recycled, while wet 
waste like food scraps, vegetable peels, etc., can be composted. Researchers 
are also finding ways to recover valuable materials, such as lithium from 
old batteries used in mobile phones and laptops.
By improving the methods for separating waste and recycling materials, 
you can help make the world cleaner, healthier and more sustainable.
y Mixtures are classified as homogeneous or heterogeneous and also 
as solutions, suspensions, or colloids.
y Separation of mixtures is a crucial process for obtaining pure 
substances. 
y Crystallization is a technique used to get a pure solid from its 
saturated solution.
y Distillation is used to separate two miscible liquids with a 
minimum difference of 25 °C in boiling points. It can also be used 
to obtain a liquid from a mixture of a liquid and a solid.
y Paper chromatography can be used to separate compounds by 
taking advantage of differences in their rates of movement on the 
paper.
y A separating funnel is used to separate two immiscible liquids 
based on their different densities. 
y The transition of a solid directly into a vapour (below its melting 
point) without passing through the liquid state is called sublimation. 
The process when the vapour cools and changes back into a solid 
without becoming a liquid is called deposition.
y Centrifugation uses rapid spinning to separate heavier solid 
particles from a solid-liquid mixture.
y Coagulation involves the addition of a substance, called a coagulant, 
to make smaller particles clump together and settle down in a 
heterogeneous mixture of solids and liquids.
y The dispersed particles in a colloid or suspension scatter light, 
which is known as the Tyndall effect.
At a Glance
Chapter-05.indd 89 03-04-2026 19:58:30
