Exploring Mixtures and their Separation 91
4. Solve the following problems:
(i) A cake recipe uses dry ingredients, namely 75 g of sugar for 
420 g of all-purpose flour and 5 g of sodium hydrogencarbonate. 
Express the concentration of each component in the mixture using 
an appropriate method.
(ii) A brass alloy contains 70% copper by mass. Calculate the quantities 
of copper and zinc present in 120 g of brass. 
5. The label on a cooking oil pack says one litre (910 g). If this oil is mixed 
with water, will it form a separate layer? If so, which substance will be 
on top? How will you separate the two layers? Also, draw the diagram 
of the apparatus used.
6. Assertion (A): Solutions do not exhibit the Tyndall effect.
Reason (R): The particles in solutions are larger than 100 nm, so they 
cannot scatter light.
Choose the correct option:
(i) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
(ii) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(iii) A is true, but R is false.
(iv) A is false, but R is true.
7. How would you separate the mixtures given in Table 5.3? Mention the 
reason for choosing your method. If a mixture cannot be separated, 
explain why.
Table 5.3
Mixture Method of separation Reason for selection
Mud from muddy water
Plasma from other components 
in the blood sample 
Naphthalene and sand
Chalk powder and common 
salt
Common salt and water 
Oil from water 
Pigments of the flower
8. Two miscible liquids, A and B, are present in a mixture. The boiling 
point of A is 60 °C and the boiling point of B is 90 °C. Suggest a method 
to separate them. Also, draw a labelled diagram of the method 
suggested.
9. Compare evaporation, crystallization and distillation. In which 
situation, would you prefer each of these over the others?
10. Blood is an example of a colloidal mixture. (i) What would happen if 
blood behaved like a true suspension inside the body? (ii) In a blood 
sample, identify the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium.
Chapter-05.indd 91 03-04-2026 19:58:32
