50 Exploration|Grade 9
Let us take the example of an athlete 
running on a straight track (Fig. 4.2).
To describe the position of the athlete, let us 
take her starting point as the reference point. As 
shown in Fig. 4.3, let us make a straight line with 
distances marked on it and mark the reference 
point on it as the origin ʻOʼ. The athlete starts 
running from O, and her positions at two 
instants of time are marked by points B and A.
Fig. 4.3: Reference point and positions of the athlete at different instants
of time on a straight line
O B A
20 m 0 m 20 m 40 m 60 m 80 m 100 m 
To describe the position of an object, we also need to specify its 
direction. For the object moving in a straight line, the object can move only 
in one of the two directions — forward and backward. Thus, the direction 
is represented by plus ( ) and minus (–) signs as shown in Fig. 4.3. Positions 
to the right of the reference point O are generally taken as positive, and to 
the left of O as negative (Fig. 4.3). 
4.1.2 Distance travelled and displacement 
Suppose an athlete starts running from point O at time t = 0 s, reaches 
point B at t = 4 s, then reaches point A at t = 10 s, then runs back along the 
same path till point B reaching there at t = 16 s (Fig. 4.4). How much is the 
total distance travelled by the athlete between the starting and stopping 
positions? The total distance travelled is OA + AB = 100 m + 60 m = 160 m. 
Let us now think about the distance between the starting and the 
stopping positions of the athlete. It is OB = 40 m, which is different from 
the total distance travelled by the athlete. So, let us now define another 
quantity — displacement. 
Displacement is the net change in the position of an object between the 
two given instants of time. A complete description of physical quantities 
like displacement requires specifying both a direction and its numerical 
value (with units). The numerical value (with units) of such a physical 
quantity is called its magnitude. The magnitude of displacement is the 
distance between the object’s positions at the two instants. The direction 
of displacement is specified from the position at the first instant towards 
the position at the second instant. To describe the total distance travelled, 
Fig. 4.2: An athlete running on a straight track
Fig. 4.4: Reference point and positions of athlete at different instants of time
Total distance travelled
Displacement
0 m
O B A
20 m
t = 0 s t = 4 s t = 10 s
t = 16 s
40 m 60 m 80 m 100 m
An instant of 
time and a time 
interval are not 
the same thing. 
An instant of 
time is a single 
reading of 
clock at a given 
point of time. 
Whereas, a time 
interval is the 
time duration 
between two 
instants of time, 
i.e., between two 
readings of a 
clock. 
Note
Ready to 
Go Beyond
Physical quantities 
which can be 
specified by just 
their numerical 
value are called 
scalars. Physical 
quantities which 
require specifying 
both the direction 
and magnitude are 
called vectors. You 
will learn 
about these 
in higher 
grades.
Next
Level
Up
Chapter-04.indd 50 28-04-2026 15:15:26
