52 Exploration|Grade 9
Motion, i.e., a change in the position of an object, can be described in 
terms of the total distance travelled by the object and its displacement. 
But how can you describe how fast or slow an object is moving?
4.1.3 Average speed and average velocity
You have learnt about average speed in an earlier grade. It tells us how 
fast or slow an object moves. The average speed of an object is the total 
distance travelled divided by the time interval during which this distance 
is covered. Thus,
total distance travelled average speed = time interval (4.1)
Since distance travelled has no direction (but only a numerical value), 
the average speed, which is calculated from distance travelled, also has no 
direction but only a numerical value. 
If an object moving in a straight line travels equal distances in equal 
intervals of time (for all possible choices of time intervals), it is said to 
be in uniform motion in a straight line. In this case, the object moves at a 
constant speed. On the other hand, if the object travels unequal distances in 
equal intervals of time, then it is in non-uniform motion in a straight line. 
In this case, the object moves with increasing speed or decreasing speed, or 
a combination of both. If the distances travelled in the successive intervals 
of times are increasing, its speed is increasing.
The concept that an object’s speed is the distance travelled divided by the time 
taken is well-established, dating back to ancient times even in India, as seen 
in the treatise Aryabhatiya (5th century CE). The following problem, based on 
this concept, is from a comprehensive mathematical text, the Ganitakaumudi 
(14th century CE). 
Indiaʼs Scientific Contributions
Example 4.1: Consider two postmen. They start walking towards each 
other from a distance of 210 yojanas (Yojana is a unit of distance used in 
ancient India). One travels 9 yojanas per day and the other covers 5 yojanas
per day. Can you determine in how many days they will meet each other?
Answer:
Total of distance covered by each postman in one day = 9 yojanas + 5 yojanas 
= 14 yojanas.
To meet with each other, the postmen need to cover 210 yojanas together.
Time taken by them to cover 210 yojanas together 210 15
14 = = days.
So, both postmen will meet each other after 15 days. 
(In 15 days, first postman will cover 135 yojanas and the second postman 
will cover 75 yojanas).
The speed tells us how fast an object is moving but it provides no 
information about the direction of motion. There are many situations where 
along with the speed, you also need to know the direction of motion to get 
a complete picture, particularly in case of complicated real-world motions. 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 8
Chapter-04.indd 52 28-04-2026 15:15:27
