Describing Motion Around Us 53
Let us define another physical quantity, average velocity, which 
describes how fast the position of an object is changing and in which 
direction.
The average velocity of an object in a time interval is the change in the 
position (or displacement) divided by the time interval in which the change 
in position (or displacement) occurs. Thus,
change in position displacement average velocity = = time interval time interval (4.2a)
If we represent average velocity by vav , displacement by s and time 
interval by t, then Eq. (4.2a) can be written as
av
s
v=
t (4.2b)
To express the average velocity, you need to specify its magnitude as 
well as the direction. How do we associate direction with velocity when the 
motion is in a straight line? The direction of the velocity is the same as the 
direction of displacement and is indicated by a ʻ ʼ or ʻ–ʼ sign. 
The SI unit of average speed and average velocity are the same. It is 
metre per second which is represented by m s–1 or m/s. It is also commonly 
measured in kilometre per hour (km h–1).
To describe how fast or slow a change in a physical quantity happens, 
we use the idea of a rate of change. The ratio of change in one quantity to 
the corresponding change in time is called the rate of change. To calculate 
average velocity, we find the ratio of change in position to the time taken 
(Eq. 4.2a). So, we can say that average velocity is the average rate of change 
of position of an object with respect to time.
Example 4.2: Sarang takes 50 seconds to swim from one end to the other 
end and back in the swimming pool shown in Fig. 4.7. Find his average 
speed and average velocity within the time interval of 50 s.
Answer:
Total distance travelled by Sarang in 50 s = 50 m
displacement of Sarang in 50 s = 0 m
1 total distance travelled 50 m average speed = = = 1 m s
time interval 50 s
−
displacement 0 m 1 average velocity = = = 0 m s
time interval 50 s
−
During the 50 s time interval, the average speed of Sarang is approximately 
1 m s –1 while his average velocity is 0 m s –1.
4. During a family road trip, you drive 200 km north in three hours. Afterwards, you drive 200 km 
south in two hours. Find the average speed and average velocity for your entire trip.
5. Under what condition(s) is the 
(i) magnitude of average velocity of an object equal to its average speed? 
(ii) magnitude of average velocity of an object zero while its average speed is not zero? 
Pause and Ponder
Fig. 4.7: Swimming pool
25 m
Note
For motion in 
a straight line, 
the average 
speed and the 
magnitude of 
average velocity 
in a time interval 
are equal if the 
object moves in 
one direction.
Chapter-04.indd 53 28-04-2026 15:15:27
