54 Exploration|Grade 9
The average velocity of an object over a large time interval may differ 
from its velocity at a particular instant. Throughout this chapter, we will use 
the term ‘velocity’ to mean the velocity of an object at a particular instant.
Ready to Go Beyond
What we simply called ‘velocity at an instant’ is known as ‘instantaneous 
velocity’. As the time interval around an instant is made progressively 
smaller (Eqn. 4.2b), the change in average velocity gets smaller and 
smaller. When the time interval becomes infinitesimally small, the 
average value of velocity approaches a fixed value called the 
instantaneous velocity. You will learn more about this physical 
quantity in higher grades.
Next
Level
Up
The velocity of an object can be constant or it can change with time. 
How can we express the change in velocity of an object?
4.1.4 Average acceleration
When you sit in a vehicle and it suddenly moves from rest, you feel a 
noticeable jolt. Similarly, when the vehicle is in motion and suddenly 
stops, you experience a jolt. These occurrences capture the feeling of the 
change in velocity. You can find the change in velocity if you know the 
velocity at two different instants of time. 
Let us now learn another physical quantity, the average acceleration. 
The average acceleration of an object over a time interval is the change in 
its velocity divided by the time interval. That is,
change in velocity average acceleration = time interval (4.3a)
 final velocity initial velocity average acceleration = time interval
− (4.3b)
If the velocity of an object changes from an initial value u at time t1
 to 
the final value v at time t2
, the average acceleration a is, 
 21
vu
a
t t
− = − (4.3c)
The SI unit of average acceleration is m s –2 or m/s2
. Like displacement 
and velocity, we need to specify the magnitude as well as the direction 
of acceleration. For motion in a straight line, if the magnitude of velocity 
is increasing in a given time interval, the average acceleration is in the 
direction of velocity (Fig. 4.8). Whereas, the average acceleration is opposite 
to the direction of velocity if the magnitude of velocity is decreasing.
Velocity Velocity
Acceleration Acceleration
Fig. 4.8: Direction of average acceleration when magnitude of velocity is 
(a) increasing, and (b) decreasing
Car is speeding up Car is slowing down
The reading of 
the speedometer 
of a vehicle is 
nearly (but not 
exactly) the same 
as the magnitude 
of the velocity at an 
instant while the 
direction of tyres 
gives the direction 
of velocity at that 
instant.
Threads of 
Curiosity
Chapter-04.indd 54 28-04-2026 15:15:27
