68 Exploration|Grade 9
In real world, the conditions for uniform circular motion — constant 
speed and a circular path — are often not met. So, uniform circular motion 
is an idealised model of the real-world situations. Still, it is a useful model 
as it serves as the foundation for more complex real-world situations, 
such as motion of planets revolving around the Sun or a vehicle making a 
circular turn.
y The distance and direction of an object with respect to the reference 
point, at any instant of time, describes the position of the object at that 
instant of time.
y If the position of the object with respect to a reference point changes 
with time, the object is said to be in motion.
y Displacement is the net change in the position of the object between 
two given instants of time.
y The average speed of an object is the total distance travelled divided 
by the time interval during which this distance is covered.
y The average velocity of an object in a time interval is the change in 
position (also known as displacement) divided by the time interval in 
which the change in position (or displacement) occurs.
y The average acceleration of an object over a time interval is the change 
in its velocity divided by the time interval.
y For the motion of an object in a straight line with constant acceleration, 
the five physical quantities — displacement (s), time interval (t), initial 
velocity (u), final velocity (v) and acceleration (a), can be related by 
the following set of kinematic equations,
v = u + at 1 2
2
s ut at = + v 2
 = u2
 + 2as
y When an object moves in a circular path with constant (uniform) 
speed, its motion is called the uniform circular motion.
At a Glance
Revise, Reflect, Refine
1. My father went to a shop from home which is located at a distance 
of 250 m on a straight road. On reaching there, he discovered that 
he forgot to carry a cloth bag. He came home to take it, went to the 
shop again, bought provisions and came back home. How much was 
the total distance travelled by him? What was his displacement from 
home?
2. A student runs from the ground floor to the fourth floor of a school 
building to collect a book and then comes down to their classroom on 
the second floor. If the height of each floor is 3 m, find:
(i) the total vertical distance travelled, and
(ii) their displacement from the starting point.
Chapter-04.indd 68 11-05-2026 16:56:51
