Describing Motion Around Us 71
y Take a cardboard disc (radius ~ 8 cm)
(Fig. 4.33). Write numbers 1 to 12 on the
outer part (7 cm from the centre) and the
letters ‘ABCDEF’ on the inner part (4 cm
from the centre), using the same font size.
Spin the disc slowly, then faster, and observe
how the numbers and letters appear. Why
do the numbers fade or disappear while the
letters remain visible? Are the speeds of the
numbers and letters the same or different?
Justify your answer.
y Many smartphones have an inbuilt accelerometer that can detect very
small accelerations. Install an app, such as Phyphox (phyphox.org) and
open ‘Accelerometer (without g)’. Note the readings when (i) the phone
is on an outstretched palm, and (ii) the phone is kept on the floor. What
differences do you observe? What does this tell you about motion and
acceleration in real situations? (Such tiny, involuntary movements are
also studied in medical research, for example, in movement disorders)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a classroom group
activity facilitated by teacher.
y For motion in a straight line with constant acceleration, we derived
two primary equations given by Eq. (4.4a) and (4.4b). Using these two
equations, three more equations can be derived, out of which we
derived one given in Eq. (4.4c). Derive the remaining two equations
given below
= − 1 2
2
s vt at ( ) 1
2
s uvt = +
In mathematics, you have learnt the formula for calculating the area 
of a trapezium. Using that formula, derive the second equation given 
above.
y Plot graphs for data given in Table 4.4, using different X and Y scales,
on different graph papers. Compare the graphs to find how the
appearance of graph is affected by the choice of scales and decide
which scale is better and why. Now repeat this with any graph plotting
app. Such apps generally automatically adjust the axes to fit the data
well on the screen.
y Talk to a motor mechanic about how a vehicle’s braking or stopping
distance is affected by: (i) wet roads, (ii) worn-out tyres, (iii) higher
vehicle mass, (iv) driving at night, (v) fog, (vi) severe weather (rain,
snow, storm), and (vii) driver reaction time. Using this information,
design safety posters for your school and prepare a short skit to present
it in the assembly.
The Journey Beyond
12
1
2
B
3
4
C
5
6
7
8
E
9
10
F
11
A
D
Fig. 4.33
Grade 8
Ganita Prakash
Part II
Chapter 7
Chapter-04.indd 71 28-04-2026 15:15:35
