PROBABILITY 423
16. In a hostel, 60% of the students read Hindi newspaper, 40% read English
newspaper and 20% read both Hindi and English newspapers. A student is
selected at random.
(a) Find the probability that she reads neither Hindi nor English newspapers.
(b) If she reads Hindi newspaper, find the probability that she reads English
newspaper.
(c) If she reads English newspaper, find the probability that she reads Hindi
newspaper.
Choose the correct answer in Exercises 17 and 18.
17. The probability of obtaining an even prime number on each die, when a pair of
dice is rolled is
(A) 0 (B)
1
3
(C)
1
12 (D)
1
36
18. Two events A and B will be independent, if
(A) A and B are mutually exclusive
(B) P(A′B′) = [1 – P(A)] [1 – P(B)]
(C) P(A) = P(B)
(D) P(A) + P(B) = 1
13.5 Bayes' Theorem
Consider that there are two bags I and II. Bag I contains 2 white and 3 red balls and
Bag II contains 4 white and 5 red balls. One ball is drawn at random from one of the
bags. We can find the probability of selecting any of the bags (i.e.
1
2
) or probability of
drawing a ball of a particular colour (say white) from a particular bag (say Bag I). In
other words, we can find the probability that the ball drawn is of a particular colour, if
we are given the bag from which the ball is drawn. But, can we find the probability that
the ball drawn is from a particular bag (say Bag II), if the colour of the ball drawn is
given? Here, we have to find the reverse probability of Bag II to be selected when an
event occurred after it is known. Famous mathematician, John Bayes' solved the problem
of finding reverse probability by using conditional probability. The formula developed
by him is known as ‘Bayes theorem’ which was published posthumously in 1763.
Before stating and proving the Bayes' theorem, let us first take up a definition and
some preliminary results.
13.5.1 Partition of a sample space
A set of events E1
, E2
, ..., En
 is said to represent a partition of the sample space S if
(a) Ei ∩ Ej
 = φ, i ≠ j, i, j = 1, 2, 3, ..., n
Reprint 2026-27
