PROBABILITY 431
If X denotes the number of heads obtained, then X is a random variable and for
each outcome, its value is as given below :
X(HH) = 2, X (HT) = 1, X (TH) = 1, X (TT) = 0.
More than one random variables can be defined on the same sample space. For
example, let Y denote the number of heads minus the number of tails for each outcome
of the above sample space S.
Then Y(HH) = 2, Y (HT) = 0, Y (TH) = 0, Y (TT) = – 2.
Thus, X and Y are two different random variables defined on the same sample
space S.
EXERCISE 13.3
1. An urn contains 5 red and 5 black balls. A ball is drawn at random, its colour is
noted and is returned to the urn. Moreover, 2 additional balls of the colour drawn
are put in the urn and then a ball is drawn at random. What is the probability that
the second ball is red?
2. A bag contains 4 red and 4 black balls, another bag contains 2 red and 6 black
balls. One of the two bags is selected at random and a ball is drawn from the bag
which is found to be red. Find the probability that the ball is drawn from the
first bag.
3. Of the students in a college, it is known that 60% reside in hostel and 40% are
day scholars (not residing in hostel). Previous year results report that 30% of all
students who reside in hostel attain A grade and 20% of day scholars attain A
grade in their annual examination. At the end of the year, one student is chosen
at random from the college and he has an A grade, what is the probability that the
student is a hostlier?
4. In answering a question on a multiple choice test, a student either knows the
answer or guesses. Let 
3
4
 be the probability that he knows the answer and 
1
4
be the probability that he guesses. Assuming that a student who guesses at the
answer will be correct with probability 
1
4
. What is the probability that the stu￾dent knows the answer given that he answered it correctly?
5. A laboratory blood test is 99% effective in detecting a certain disease when it is
in fact, present. However, the test also yields a false positive result for 0.5% of
the healthy person tested (i.e. if a healthy person is tested, then, with probability
0.005, the test will imply he has the disease). If 0.1 percent of the population
Reprint 2026-27
