Foreword
The National Education Policy 2020, envisages a system of 
education in the country that is rooted in Indian ethos and its 
civilisational accomplishments in all domains of human endeavour 
and knowledge while at the same time preparing the students to 
constructively engage with the prospects and challenges of the 
twenty-first century. The basis for this aspirational vision has been 
well laid out by the National Curriculum Framework for School 
Education (NCF-SE) 2023 across curricular areas at all stages. Having 
nurtured the students’ inherent abilities touching upon all the five 
planes of human existence, the pañchakośhas, in the Foundational 
and the Preparatory Stages have paved the way for the progression 
of their learning further at the Middle Stage. Thus, the Middle Stage 
acts as a bridge between the Preparatory and the Secondary Stages, 
spanning three years from Grades 6 to 8.
This framework, at the Middle Stage, aims to equip students 
with the skills that are needed to grow, as they advance in their 
lives. It endeavours to enhance their analytical, descriptive, and 
narrative capabilities, and to prepare them for the challenges and 
opportunities that await them. A diverse curriculum, covering 
nine subjects ranging from three languages—including at least two 
languages native to India—to Science, Mathematics, Social Sciences, 
Art Education, Physical Education and Well-being, and Vocational 
Education promotes their holistic development.
Such a transformative learning culture requires certain essential 
conditions. One of them is to have appropriate textbooks in 
different curricular areas as these textbooks will play a central role 
in mediating between content and pedagogy—a role that will strike 
a judicious balance between direct instruction and opportunities 
for exploration and inquiry. Among the other conditions, classroom 
arrangement and teacher preparation are crucial to establish 
conceptual connections both within and across curricular areas.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training, on 
its part, is committed to providing students with such high-quality 
textbooks. Various Curricular Area Groups, which have been 
constituted for this purpose, comprising notable subject-experts, 
pedagogues, and practising teachers as their members, have made 
0 Prelims.indd 3 23/12/2024 16:06:54
Reprint 2026-27
