iv
all possible efforts to develop such textbooks. Curiosity, Textbook 
of Science for Grade 6, is one of these. It has been developed in 
consonance with the recommendations of NEP 2020 and the 
NCF-SE 2023 to take students on a journey of experiential learning 
by citing examples from the world of the learners. The content 
stimulates curiosity, a sense of exploration, questioning, and critical 
thinking. The content seamlessly weaves together concepts from 
physics, chemistry, biology, and earth science, along with cross-cutting 
themes like environmental education, value education, inclusive 
education, and Indian Knowledge Systems (IKS). The textbook aims 
to engage learners through an integrated approach by including 
multiple activities and thoughtful use of technology. The textbook 
offers ample opportunities for reflection and group discussions. 
To encourage creativity and innovation, it is feasible to regard 
students as active participants in the learning process, rather than 
mere recipients of a predetermined set of knowledge. This can 
only be achieved if the necessary number of hours are dedicated to 
science teaching–learning annually as outlined in NCF-SE 2023. The 
pedagogical approach of the textbook also considers how important 
it is for students to think critically, reason well and make decisions. 
It also provides students with numerous opportunities to learn from 
each other, making the learning experience more engaging for both 
teachers and students.
However, in addition to this textbook, students at this stage 
should also be encouraged to explore various other learning 
resources. School libraries play a crucial role in making such 
resources available. Besides, the role of parents and teachers will 
also be invaluable in guiding and encouraging students to do so.
With this, I express my gratitude to all those who have been 
involved in the development of this textbook and hope that it 
will meet the expectations of all stakeholders. At the same time, I 
also invite suggestions and feedback from all its users for further 
improvement in the coming years.
New Delhi
30 June 2024
Dinesh Prasad Saklani
Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training
0 Prelims.indd 4 23/12/2024 16:06:55
Reprint 2026-27
