About the Book
Curiosity, Textbook of Science for Grade 6 learners has been crafted 
in alignment with the recommendations of the National Education 
Policy (NEP) 2020 and the National Curriculum Framework for 
School Education (NCF-SE) 2023. The policy advocates a radical shift 
from a content-based education to a competency-based education, 
particularly in the realm of science. Therefore, the formulation of 
curricular goals for Science, subsequent competencies and learning 
outcomes are tailored towards competency-based learning. These 
curricular goals encompass various scientific concepts, including 
matter, the physical and living world, health, hygiene, and the 
exploration of the interface between science, society and technology. 
Additionally, the goals focus on the nature of science, its processes, 
historical and contemporary aspects of the development of science 
and science communication. While these goals are explicitly 
articulated, they are interdependent and collectively contribute 
to a better understanding of the world around us. Accordingly, the 
chapters of this textbook are structured around creative activities, 
reflective questions, processes and illustrations. The integration of 
the concepts from biology, chemistry, physics and earth science, and 
cross-cutting themes, such as value education, inclusive education, 
Indian Knowledge Systems (IKS) and environmental education 
have been interwoven in the content. Thus, the textbook aims to 
provide experience-based learning, rather than simply reading and 
memorising the concepts.
In the Middle Stage, science teaching–learning adopts 
an integrated approach. This integrated approach develops 
fundamental capacities across biology, chemistry, physics and 
earth science. The use of an integrated approach helps the learners 
to appreciate the interrelations between subjects and make sense 
of their observations and experiences.
Curiosity, Textbook of Science for Grade 6, comprises twelve 
chapters. As the name of the textbook suggests, there are numerous 
opportunities for the learners to explore the world of science and 
its nature. Through the chapters, learners will embark on a journey 
that will connect them to the world around and spark curiosity for 
further exploration. The hands-on activities embedded within each 
chapter engages the learners and provide them an opportunity to 
0 Prelims.indd 5 23/12/2024 16:06:55
Reprint 2026-27
