vi
reflect on learning. These activities are inclusive in nature. Some 
activities require both the teacher and learners to prepare in 
advance.
Chapter 1, titled ‘The Wonderful World of Science’, provides a 
holistic view of the new topic of Science introduced in the Middle 
Stage. It showcases, through examples, the essence of Science—a 
way of thinking, observing, and finding out by doing, and by asking 
questions. This chapter weaves together the concepts covered in 
the rest of the book, and aims to excite the readers as they start 
their adventures into the world of science. There are no assessment 
exercises in this chapter and is designed to be non-evaluative. 
Also, every chapter in the book begins with an introduction that 
makes the learners curious and tries to show different ways with 
which the goals of the curriculum can be achieved effectively. 
The chapters begin with the stories related to real-life situations, 
these are meant to capture learners’ interest and connect them 
with what is already known. The various activities given are based 
on scientific processes, designed to provide hands and minds-on 
experiences. Following each activity, there are questions to help 
learners understand and assess how well they have grasped the 
information. Questions are significant in the learning process. They 
help learners to explore and reinforce their understanding. One will 
also find many thought-provoking questions designed to encourage 
deep thinking, self-awareness and critical analysis. These questions 
prompt learners to ponder and delve deeper into their thoughts.
In order to sustain the interest of the readers, some of the 
challenging ideas, additional information, poems, stories, strange 
facts and other interesting materials are also presented as add on 
non-evaluative content in the boxes labelled ‘Do you know?’, ‘More 
to know!’, ‘Think it over!’ and ‘More to do!’. The thrill of scientific 
inquiry comes from pursuing the unknown, giving learners the 
opportunity to think and explore beyond the syllabus. Some chapters 
also include a section called ‘Know a scientist’, which presents the 
contributions of Indian scientists related to that concept. All these box 
items, including brief biographies of scientists, are non-evaluative. 
The important ideas and steps in understanding a given concept 
of science are included as ‘Keywords’ at the end of each chapter. 
These ‘Keywords’ will help learners to acknowledge various 
0 Prelims.indd 6 23/12/2024 16:06:56
Reprint 2026-27
