vii
ideas and encourage them to think more deeply about the content. 
The keywords related to scientific processes depict the steps or 
procedure involved in the scientific activities. These words guide 
learners on how scientific knowledge is generated, tested and 
applied. ‘Summary’ offers an overview of the chapter’s main points, 
reinforcing the key ideas discussed. It serves to outline the content 
presented in the chapter. A non-evaluative interesting element that 
has been incorporated in some of the chapters is the introduction of 
certain verses from various Indian texts to promote rootedness in 
the learners as envisaged in NEP 2020.
The primary aim of Curiosity is to prepare the children for 
becoming the responsible members of the society, and therefore 
efforts have been made to raise awareness about various issues, such 
as gender, region, environment, health and hygiene, water scarcity 
and energy conservation. Activities given in the book endeavour to 
promote peer-learning and group activities.
The assessment exercises, ‘Let us enhance our learning’, play 
a vital role in the learning process. They help to reinforce the 
understanding and identify areas for improvement, making them 
essential components of effective teaching and learning. Assessment 
consists of various exercises, from pictorial questions to creating 
puzzles and multiple-choice questions, to create a challenging 
and interesting experience for the learners. These questions also 
facilitate the evaluation of various competencies expected to be 
developed through a particular chapter. Peer and group activities 
to explore answers to the questions are also encouraged.
A significant feature of the book is what we termed as ‘Learning 
further’. In this section, some projects and activities are designed to 
increase learners’ interaction with experts, teachers, parents and 
the wider community. Learners are encouraged to gather diverse 
information and draw their own conclusions. 
The textbook is just one way to learn. Learners should enhance 
their knowledge by exploring and observing their surroundings. 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) can also be a 
valuable tool for learners’ learning and development, when used 
appropriately. Learners can explore ICT with the help of Quick 
Response (QR) codes provided in the textbook. QR codes make the 
reading experiences more interactive and enjoyable. These QR 
0 Prelims.indd 7 23/12/2024 16:06:57
Reprint 2026-27
