Curiosity | Textbook of Science| Grade 6
128
The normal temperature of a healthy human body is taken 
to be 37.0 °C. But in this activity, did you find that the normal 
temperature of every person was 37.0 °C? Or did you find the 
temperature slightly higher or lower for some people? 
The temperature of every person may not 
be 37.0 °C. What we call normal temperature 
is the average body temperature of a large 
number of healthy people. A perfectly 
healthy person may, therefore, have a 
normal temperature slightly different from 
37.0 °C. The body temperature is influenced 
by several factors, such as age, time of the 
day and activity level.
You may try measuring your own 
temperature at different times of the day and 
on different days. Record the thermometer 
readings in your notebook. After a month, 
analyse your temperature record and see if 
there are any variations. If yes, try to think 
what might be the reasons for that. 
The temperature of human beings does 
not normally go below 35 °C or above 42 °C. 
For measuring the body temperature 
of small children or old people, the digital 
thermometer can also be placed in the 
armpit. The temperature measured this way 
is about 0.5 °C to 1 °C lower than the actual 
body temperature.
There is another scale of temperature 
known as Fahrenheit scale. On this scale, the 
unit of temperature is degreeFahrenheit and 
is denoted by °F. A temperature measured as 
37.0 °C on Celsius scale is equivalent to 98.6 °F 
on Fahrenheit scale. The Fahrenheit scale is 
not used in most scientific studies anymore. 
In scientific work, there is another scale of 
temperature known as Kelvin scale. On this 
scale, the unit for temperature is kelvin and 
is denoted by K. The SI unit of temperature
is kelvin.
Do small children 
generally have 
slightly higher body 
temperatures as 
compared to adults?
?
Do old people, even 
when healthy, generally 
have lower body 
temperatures than 
young adults?
?
I have seen a friend of mine 
using a digital thermometer 
that reads temperature on 
a different scale. It shows 
the normal temperature of 
a healthy human body as 
98.6 °F. What is the reason 
for this difference?
Chapter 7.indd 128 10/4/2024 3:14:52 PM
Reprint 2026-27
