64Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Why does the burning of fossil fuels affect the climate? In the 
Earth’s natural carbon cycle, carbon dioxide (CO2
) and other 
gases are released gradually into the atmosphere and trap heat 
from the Sun. This natural ‘greenhouse effect’ warms Earth 
enough to support life. However, human activities like industry, 
transportation, and agriculture have released enormous 
amounts of these ‘greenhouse gases’ in just a few centuries. This 
sudden increase traps extra heat, causing rapid global warming 
and disrupting the climate patterns that plants, animals, and 
human societies have adapted to over thousands of years.
In India, rising temperatures are perceptible in many regions. 
Early in 2025, for instance, the country’s average temperature 
was 1 to 3°C above normal, as a result of which the winter 
was much shorter and milder than usual. This affects not only 
agricultural production but also many small-scale industries. 
This is only one example showing how a warmer planet will 
present us with increasing challenges.
Understanding the relationship between the causes of climate 
change and disasters can help us to prepare better for these 
challenges. It also supports the need for more environment￾friendly practices and building resilience and adaptation in 
communities. Governments worldwide, including India’s, 
attempt to promote measures of climate mitigation, such as 
cutting down on greenhouse gas emissions, planting trees, 
boosting renewable energy and improving energy efficiency, 
promoting sustainable lifestyles, etc. But these often clash with a 
desire for economic growth and increased consumption. 
Before we move on ... 
Æ India’s diverse climate is shaped by its geography, including 
mountains, deserts, and plateaus.
Æ Weather is short-term, seasons recur on a yearly basis, and 
climate reflects long-term patterns over decades.
Æ Factors such as latitude, altitude, proximity to the sea, wind 
and topography determine the climate.
Æ Monsoons are vital for agriculture, influencing crop cycles 
and livelihoods.
Resilience:
The capacity 
to withstand 
or recover 
quickly from 
difficulties.
Mitigation:
The adoption 
of steps to 
help slow 
down global 
warming 
and reduce 
the causes 
of climate 
change.
Sustainable:
Something 
which can be 
maintained over a 
long period 
of time.
Chapter 3.indd 64 08-04-2025 12:45:54
Reprint 2026-27
