106Exploring Society: India and Beyond Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions
Indian culture, by any estimate, is several millenniums old. 
Like any ancient tree, it has many roots and many branches. 
The roots nurture a common trunk. And from the trunk 
emerge many branches, which are different manifestations 
of Indian culture, yet united by a common trunk.
Some of these branches are about art, literature, science, 
medicine, religion, the art of governance, martial arts, and 
so on. There are also ‘schools of thought’, by which we mean 
groups of thinkers or spiritual seekers who share similar 
ideas about human life, the world, etc.
Many archaeologists and scholars have pointed out that 
some of India’s cultural roots go all the way to the Indus 
or Harappan or Sindhu-Sarasvatī civilisation (which we 
visit in Chapter 6). Later on, over time, hundreds of schools 
of thought emerged in India. We will see here a few early 
schools, which have shaped India into a country with a 
unique personality. By understanding them and their roots, 
we can understand ‘India, that is Bharat’ better.
The Vedas and Vedic Culture
a. What are the Vedas? 
The word “Veda” comes from the Sanskrit vid which 
means ‘knowledge’ (hence vidyā, for instance). We briefly 
mentioned the Ṛig Veda in earlier chapters. In fact, there 
are four Vedas — the Ṛig Veda, the Yajur Veda, the Sāma 
Veda and the Atharva Veda. They are the most ancient texts 
of India, and indeed among the most ancient in the world. 
The Vedas consist of thousands of hymns — prayers in the 
form of poems and songs — that were recited orally, not 
written. Those hymns were composed in the Sapta Sindhava 
region (which we visit in Chapter 5). It is difficult to say 
when exactly the Ṛig Veda, the most ancient of the four, 
was composed; experts have proposed dates ranging from 
Spiritual: 
Concerned 
with the spirit 
or soul (ātman
in Sanskrit and 
many Indian 
languages). 
Spirituality is 
the search for a 
deeper or higher 
dimension 
beyond 
our current 
personality.
Seeker:
Someone who 
seeks the truths 
of this world. 
This could 
be a sage, a 
saint, a yogi, a 
philosopher, etc.
chapter7_310125.indd 106 03-02-2025 05:04:34
