186
Understanding Society:
India and Beyond
Grade 9 – Part 1 
LET’S EXPLORE 
Æ Ask your parents about how they make choices for everyday 
purchase. What is the opportunity cost of making a particular 
decision?
Æ How do you decide to spend your time? Is time a scarce 
resource?
What does Economics Deal with?
The word Economics comes from the Greek word oikonomia, which 
in turn is composed of two words: oikos, which is usually translated 
as ‘household’; and nemein, which is best translated as ‘management’. 
So, economics refers to household management. In the case of limited 
resources and unlimited wants, not just families but also nations 
must plan how to use their resources efficiently.
Since resources have competing uses, individuals, enterprises, 
and governments must decide how to best allocate them, as these 
decisions affect the well-being of people and society as a whole. 
The discipline of Economics deals with how choices are made by 
optimising the use of limited resources to satisfy the needs and wants. 
It explains how different economic entities—consumers, producers,
governments, and financial institutions—interact in an economy. 
For example, how people work and earn wages, how wealth and 
resources are distributed, how prices are determined in the 
market, how education and technology drive investment, and how 
government policies and trade influence prices in the market, 
employment, and so on.
However, good decisions rely on data and analysis, not guesswork. 
For example, families allocate their money for essential items (such 
as food, medicines, and school supplies), non-essential items (such 
as jewellery, entertainment, and restaurant meals) and savings. 
Governments use revenue from taxation to plan expenditure on 
infrastructure and welfare programmes. Enterprises study market 
trends and new innovations to better serve customers and maximise 
profits. Economists study the available alternatives, associated 
opportunity costs, and potential outcomes to help individuals, 
enterprises, and institutions make decisions. They use data from 
government reports such as economic surveys and financial 
statements of companies, and their analysis helps to understand the 
potential risks and opportunities. The scope of their work includes: 
Economy: 
The state of a 
country or region 
in terms of the 
production and 
consumption 
of goods and 
services, and the 
flow of money.
Surveys:
A systematic 
method for 
collecting and 
analysing data 
related to 
the economic 
conditions and 
behaviours of 
populations.
Data: Facts 
and statistics 
collected 
together for 
reference or 
analysis.
Economic 
entities: One 
who participates 
in an economic 
activity, for 
example, 
producers, 
consumers, 
government, and 
enterprises. 
Chapter 8.indd 186 17-Jun-26 7:18:35 PM
