191
8 – Building Blocks 
in Economics: 
The Problem of Choice 
Planned Economy 
In a planned economy, a central planning authority of the 
government, such as the planning commission, makes all major 
economic decisions in the market, that is, what and how much will be 
produced, how they will be produced, and who will get to use them 
and at what prices. The government has ownership in most resources 
and sectors like land, factories, banks, and transport. With limited 
private ownership, enterprises usually follow the central authority’s 
targets rather than market demand, and are heavily regulated by the 
government through strict permits and licenses to produce goods 
and services. However, this prevents a large number of enterprises to 
operate in the market and thus restricts competition among private 
enterprises. As a result, there is little motivation among enterprises to 
improve quality or innovate. Some examples of planned economies 
are the former Soviet Union, North Korea, and Cuba.
Market Economy
In a market economy, the questions of what, how, and how much to 
produce are addressed mainly by the forces of demand and supply 
with little government intervention. Often, the government acts like 
a referee in a football match. It ensures safety and law and order, and 
it does not control prices or production. The ownership of factories, 
shops, land, and other resources, largely rests with individuals and 
private companies. Many producers offer similar products, which 
encourages better quality, lower prices, and innovation in production 
of goods and services. Some of the prominent examples include 
the United States of America, Japan, and Hong Kong. However, 
governments play an important role even in these economies.
LET’S EXPLORE 
Æ In your opinion, should the government completely stay out
of enterprise decisions?
Æ Can you think of an example where government action helped 
or harmed an industry or sector?
Planned 
economy: 
An economic 
system in which 
the allocation of 
resources, and 
prices of goods 
and services are 
determined by 
the government.
Market 
economy:
An economic 
system in which 
the allocation 
of resources, 
and the prices 
of goods and 
services are 
determined 
primarily by 
market forces. 
The role of the 
government 
is to provide 
public goods 
and physical 
infrastructure.
Government Role
Ensures safety and law and order 
without controlling prices.
Private Ownership
Individuals and enterprises own 
factories, shops, and land.
Market
Economy
Fig. 8.7. Role of government and private ownership in a market economy
Chapter 8.indd 191 17-Jun-26 7:18:44 PM
