Proportional Reasoning–2
57
Try to find the distances between the same two pairs of cities with 
different maps that have different scales (ratios). Do they all give the 
same geographical distance, approximately?
Note to the Teacher: Bring maps and atlases to the classroom and encourage 
students to observe the scale given as a ratio (usually in the lower right corner) 
on the map. Use the maps and atlases in the library and ask students to find the 
geographical distances between two locations on the map that are of local interest. 
Ask them to verify with each other if they get similar distances and to find the 
reasons if the distances are very different.
Map Making Activity: Guide students to make a sketch of their 
classroom with an accurate scale (ratio of 1: 50). They should mark 
the location of various objects in the classroom like the teacher᾿s 
desk, blackboard, fans and lights, according to scale. Students can use 
appropriate symbols to represent different objects like fans, lights, 
tables, chairs, and so on.
3.3 Ratios with More than 2 Terms
Viswanath is experimenting with a spice 
mix powder. He makes the powder by 
grinding 8 spoons of coriander seeds, 
4 red chillies, 2 spoons of toor dal, and 
1 spoon of fenugreek (methi) seeds. 
For his spice mix powder, the ratio of 
coriander seeds to red chillies to toor 
dal to fenugreek seeds is 
8 : 4 : 2 : 1.
Notice that the ratio has 4 terms. 
Ratios can have many terms if each of the quantities change by the same 
factor to maintain the proportional relationship.
Puneet has only 2 red chillies in his kitchen. But he wants to make spice 
mix powder that tastes the same as Viswanath’s spice mix powder. How 
much of the other ingredients should Puneet use to make his spice mix 
powder?
For Puneet’s spice mix powder to be similar to Viswanath’s, the ratio of 
all the ingredients should be the same as Viswanath’s spice mix powder. 
Puneet has only 2 red chillies. He has half the number of chillies that 
Viswanath used in his mixture. So, the quantity of the other ingredients 
should also be reduced to half.
Thus, Puneet should add 4 spoons of coriander seeds, 2 red chillies, 
1 spoon of toor dal, and half a spoon of fenugreek seeds. The ratio is
4 : 2 : 1 : 0.5.
03_Chapter 3.indd 57 20-12-2025 16:36:26
