Algebra Play
147
11. Karim and the Genie
Karim was taking a nap under a tree. He had a dream 
about a magical lamp and a genie. He heard a voice 
saying, “I have come to serve you, Oh master”. He woke 
up and to his surprise, it was a genie!
“Do you want to make money?”, asked the genie. 
Karim nodded dumbly in bewilderment. The genie 
continued, “Do you see the banyan tree over there? All 
you have to do is go around it once. The money in your 
pocket will double”.
Karim immediately started towards the tree, only to 
be stopped by the genie. “One moment!”, said the genie. 
“Since I am bringing you great riches, you should share 
some of your gains with me. You must give me 8 coins 
each time you go around the tree.”
Thinking that was a trifling amount, Karim readily 
agreed.
He went around the tree once. Just as the genie had 
said, the number of coins in his pocket doubled! He gave 
8 coins to the genie. He made another round. Again the 
number of coins doubled. He gave 8 more coins to the 
genie. He went around the tree for the third time. The 
number of coins doubled again, but to his horror, he was left with only 
8 coins, exactly the number of coins he owed the genie!
As Karim began to wonder how the genie tricked him, the genie let 
out a loud laugh and disappeared.
(i) How many coins did Karim initially have?
(ii) For what cost per round should Karim agree to the deal, if he 
wants to increase the number of coins he has?
(iii) Through its magical powers, the genie knows the number of 
coins that Karim has. How should the genie set the cost per 
round so that it gets all of Karim’s coins? 
y Algebra is very useful in modeling and understanding 
numerical scenarios. Because of this, it occurs in almost all 
areas of mathematics, science and beyond.
y Algebra is an indispensable tool in justifying mathematical 
statements.
y We applied algebra to analyse ‘Think of a Number’ tricks, 
number pyramids, grids, ways of forming numbers using given 
digits to maximise certain products, divisibility tricks, and 
various other problems.
SUMMARY
Math 
Talk
06_Chapter 6.indd 147 20-12-2025 16:51:47
