Chapter 10 — Light: Mirrors and Lenses 153
During the summer holidays, Meena went to a science centre with 
her family. The centre had many fascinating displays on nature, 
space, and technology. While her parents explored a section on 
saving water and electricity, Meena and her brother wandered off 
to look around. In one corner, Meena noticed a row of unusual, 
curved mirrors. Curious, she stepped closer and looked into one. 
Her face appeared unusually large, while her brother, standing 
a little farther away, looked upside down! At another mirror, she 
saw a tiny version of herself. Meena was puzzled.
She remembered doing activities with a mirror earlier where 
the image formed by the mirror was of the same size as the object 
and was erect (in the chapter ‘Light: Shadows and Reflections’ 
in Curiosity, Grade 7). Seeing her confusion, a guide from the 
science centre walked up to her and smiled. “These are not plane 
mirrors,” the guide explained. “These are spherical mirrors. 
When the mirror is curved inward or outward, your image looks 
different in them!” Meena’s curiosity grew and she decided to 
talk to her teacher about these spherical mirrors.
10.1 What Are Spherical Mirrors?
Activity 10.1: Let us explore
z Take a shiny metallic spoon and hold its 
curved surface close to your face. Can you 
see your image in it?
z Notice the image of your face. Is it different 
from the image you see in a plane mirror? 
z While observing the image, slowly move the 
spoon away from your face. Do you observe 
any change in the image?
z Now flip the spoon and repeat the same steps.
Did you notice that the shiny metallic spoon acted 
like a mirror and you could see your image in it? 
When you looked at the inner side of the spoon which is curved 
inwards, you must have observed that the image was inverted 
(Fig. 10.1a). When you looked at the outer side of the spoon which 
bulges outwards, the image of your face was erect but smaller in 
size (Fig. 10.1b). 
Curved mirrors, like the spoon, can also be specially made. 
Spherical mirrors are a common type of curved mirrors which 
are shaped like a part of a hollow glass sphere. Mirrors, whose 
reflecting surfaces are spherical are called spherical mirrors. 
(a) (b)
Fig. 10.1: Image formed in a shiny 
metallic spoon from its (a) Inner curved 
surface; (b) Outer curved surface
Chapter 10.indd 153 6/28/2025 6:00:46 PM
Reprint 2026-27
