156
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
In the concave mirror, when the object is placed close to the 
mirror, the image is erect but larger than the object in size, that is, 
enlarged. However, when the object is moved farther away, the 
image becomes inverted. Initially, the image is enlarged in size and 
then keeps getting smaller. In case of a convex mirror, the image 
is always erect and smaller than the object, that is diminished. 
However, the size of the image decreases slightly as the object is 
moved away from the convex mirror. 
This activity shows that spherical mirrors (concave and 
convex) behave differently from plane mirrors. A plane mirror 
always forms an erect image of the same size as the object. 
However, in the concave and convex mirrors, the size of the 
image changes as the distance of the object from the mirror 
changes. In addition, in the case of a concave mirror, the image 
also gets inverted when the object is taken away from the mirror. 
Lateral inversion of the image is seen in all three types of mirrors. 
I just got an idea. We can also identify 
whether a mirror is plane, or concave, 
or convex by looking at the images of an 
object formed in them!
Yes. But where do we 
find concave and convex 
mirrors being used in 
our surroundings?
The reflectors of torches, headlights of cars 
and scooters are concave in shape (Fig. 10.6a).
Have you ever noticed a dental mirror used by 
a dentist for inspecting teeth? It is a concave 
mirror which provides an enlarged view of teeth 
when held close to the teeth inside the mouth 
(Fig. 10.6b). 
A step further
Do you remember learning about the use of telescope in the chapter 
‘Beyond Earth’ in Curiosity, Grade 6? Most modern telescopes are 
reflecting telescope that use curved mirrors, with the main mirror 
being a large concave mirror. 
Look at the side-view mirrors on vehicles (Fig. 10.7a). These 
mirrors are convex. They always form an erect image of the 
traffic behind and smaller than the actual vehicles. Also, since the 
Fig. 10.6: Use of concave mirror (a) As a 
reflector of a torch; (b) By a dentist
(a) (b)
Chapter 10.indd 156 12-Sep-25 2:20:06 PM
Reprint 2026-27
