158
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
z Make the beam of light fall on the mirror at different angles 
and observe how the direction of the reflected beam changes.
To understand this better, let us draw this on a paper, step by 
step. But before doing that, let us learn how to represent light.
We often represent light by straight lines with arrows, or rays. 
Rays indicate the path along which light travels. Do you remember 
learning earlier that the light travels along a straight line?
z Draw a line showing the position of the plane mirror.
Also, draw lines with arrows (rays) indicating the beam of 
light falling on the mirror and the reflected beam of light as 
shown in Fig. 10.9a.
The ray of light that falls on the mirror is called the incident 
ray. The ray of light that comes back from the mirror is called the 
reflected ray.
z Now remove the mirror. From the point where the incident 
ray strikes the mirror, draw a line making an angle of 90° to the 
line representing the mirror. This line is known as the normal
to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence, O (Fig. 10.9b).
The angle between the normal and the incident ray is called 
the angle of incidence (i) (Fig. 10.9c). The angle between the 
normal and the reflected ray is known as the angle of reflection
(r) (Fig. 10.9c). 
z On your drawing, measure the angle of incidence and the 
angle of reflection and note it in Table 10.1. 
z Repeat the activity several times by changing the angle of 
incidence. 
z Finally, let the incident beam fall on the mirror along the 
normal and observe the direction of the reflected beam. 
What would be the angle of incidence and angle of reflection 
in this case? Both the angles would be zero in this case.
S.No. Angle of incidence (i) Angle of reflection (r)
Table 10.1: Measuring angles of incidence and reflection
Do you notice that both angles in Table 10.1 are nearly 
equal? If done carefully, the experiment shows that the angle of 
incidence (i) is equal to the angle of reflection (r). This is a law 
of reflection.
Fig. 10.9: (a) Drawing 
incident and reflected 
rays; (b) Drawing the 
normal; (c) Angle of 
incidence and angle of 
reflection; 
(d) Measuring angles
(a)
i r
(c)
normal
(d)
(b)
O
Incident
ray
i r
Plane mirror
Reflected 
ray
Chapter 10.indd 158 6/28/2025 6:01:27 PM
Reprint 2026-27
