162
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
We explored the images of an 
object formed by curved mirrors. 
But how do objects look when 
viewed through transparent 
materials with curved surfaces?
10.4 What Is a Lens?
Imagine looking through a flat 
transparent glass window pane—all 
objects look the same size and shape. 
But would those objects continue to 
look the same if the surface of the 
transparent material is curved?
Activity 10.8: Let us explore
z Collect a flat strip of glass or clear plastic, such as a flat scale, 
few drops of oil, dropper, water, and a paper or book with 
some text printed on it.
z Spread a few drops of oil on the surface of glass or plastic 
strip and rub it to leave a very thin coating. You can also use 
wax instead of oil.
z Using a dropper or your finger, place a small drop of water 
on the oiled/waxed spot. (The oil/wax helps the water form a 
nice round drop.) 
z Examine the water drop. What is the shape of its surface? Is 
it flat or curved inward or curved outward?
z Place the paper underneath the glass/plastic strip such that 
the text is directly under the water drop (see Fig. 10.13).
z Now, look down through the water drop at the text below. 
Do you find some change in the size of the letters just below 
the water drop? Do they look enlarged or smaller?
The surface of the water drop is curved outside. The letters 
under the water drop look different— they might appear larger 
than the letters nearby! The curved surface of the water drop 
made the size of the text look different. This curved drop of water 
is acting like a simple lens. Have you seen a magnifying glass as 
shown in Fig. 10.14? It is also a lens that helps in reading small 
print by making the letters appear bigger.
A lens is a piece of transparent material, 
usually made of glass or plastic, which has 
curved surfaces. Like mirrors, lenses can also 
be convex or concave. 
A lens which is thicker at the middle as 
compared to the edges is called a convex lens
(Fig. 10.15).
Fig. 10.13: View of text 
beneath the water drop
Fig. 10.15: (a) A convex lens; 
(b) Its representation
(a) (b)
Fig. 10.14: A magnifying glass
Chapter 10.indd 162 11-Sep-25 11:09:33 AM
Reprint 2026-27
