Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
122
Observe your surroundings and notice what animals eat. 
Animals eat diff erent types of food. Bees and sunbirds suck the nectar 
of fl owers, while infants of humans and many other animals feed on 
their mother’s milk. Snakes, like python, swallow the animals they 
prey upon. Some aquatic animals fi lter tiny food particles fl oating 
nearby and feed upon them. 
Animals, including humans, obtain 
energy from food, which enables them to 
carry out various life processes. Animals 
consume food that contains complex 
components, such as carbohydrate, protein, 
and fat. These complex food components 
have to be broken down into simpler forms 
before the body can use them. But how does 
this process happen? 
Breaking down of complex food 
components into simpler forms occurs in a 
long tube called the alimentary canal. This 
process starts in the mouth and ends at the 
anus (Fig. 9.1). As food moves through this 
canal, digestive juices secreted at diff erent 
parts break it down into simpler forms. 
This simpler form of food is absorbed by 
diff erent parts of our alimentary canal and 
transported to various parts of our body to 
carry out various functions.
9.1 Nutrition in Animals 
How do the complex food components get broken down into 
simpler forms and used by the body in various animals? Is this 
process the same in all animals or does it vary? Let us fi rst try to 
understand this process in humans.
9.1.1 Digestion in human beings
Let us trace the journey of food inside our body as it passes 
through diff erent parts of the alimentary canal.
Beginning with the mouth cavity
The journey of the food you eat begins when it enters your 
mouth. Your teeth break down food you eat into smaller pieces 
by the processes of crushing and chewing. This process of initial 
breakdown of food into fi ne pieces is called mechanical digestion. 
Think about your favourite food. Does your mouth feel watery? 
Fig. 9.1: Human digestive system
Stomach
Oesophagus 
or Food pipe
Liver
Pancreas
Large intestine
Anus
Mouth
Small intestine
Rectum
Chapter 9.indd 122 4/3/2025 4:55:08 PM
Reprint 2026-27
