Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
124
Did you observe that the colour of boiled rice turned blue-black 
in test tube A, while in test tube B, chewed boiled rice either did 
not change colour or turned only a very light blue-black colour? 
What causes the change of colour in test tube A? In Grade 6, we 
learned that iodine gives a blue-black colour when it reacts with 
starch. In test tube A, the appearance of the blue-black colour 
indicates the presence of starch. In test tube B, which contains 
chewed boiled rice, if there is no change in colour, it indicates 
that the starch is no longer present; if there is only a slight 
change in colour, it indicates that starch is present only in very 
small amount. It has been broken down into simple sugars by 
the action of saliva. If the colour still appears in test tube B, what 
changes would you make in the activity to explore it further? 
Would the colour change if chewing time is increased? Try to 
fi nd out by repeating the activity.
Now, we know that saliva secretion in the mouth helps break 
down starch into sugars. This process of breaking complex food 
components into simpler forms in the body is called digestion. Food 
is partially digested in the mouth. Let us learn how this partially 
digested food gets further digested through the alimentary canal. 
Food pipe (Oesophagus): A passage from the mouth to the 
stomach
When you chew your food, your 
saliva not only helps in digesting 
the starch but also moistens 
it, making it soft and easy to 
swallow. Your tongue helps in 
mixing chewed food with saliva 
and pushing this softened food 
into a long, fl exible tube called 
the food pipe or oesophagus
(Fig. 9.2). But how does the food 
move down? 
The walls of the food pipe gently contract and relax in a 
wave-like motion to push the food down into the stomach. This 
movement takes place throughout the alimentary canal and 
pushes the food forward.
Stomach
In the stomach, the walls contract and relax to churn the food. The 
churned food is then mixed with a secretion from the inner lining 
of the stomach. The secretion from stomach contains digestive juice, 
acid, and mucus. 
Fig. 9.2: Movement of food in the food pipe
Site of 
relaxation
Stomach Stomach
Food
Food
Food
Site of contraction
Chapter 9.indd 124 4/3/2025 4:55:09 PM
Reprint 2026-27
