Life Processes in Animals
125
The digestive juice of the stomach breaks 
down proteins present in the food into simpler 
components. 
The acid not only helps break down proteins 
but also kills many harmful bacteria. The mucus 
protects the stomach lining from the acid, preventing 
damage. In the stomach, the food is partially digested 
and transformed into a semi-liquid mass, preparing 
it for the next stage of digestion. Fig. 9.3: Stomach
Digestive juice, 
acid and mucus
Stomach wall
FASCINATING FACTS
How did scientists learn about digestion in the human body?
The discovery of how the stomach works happened 
by chance. In 1822, a man named Alexis St. Martin 
was accidentally shot in the stomach. He was treated 
by a doctor, William Beaumont. However, his wound 
never fully healed, leaving a small permanent hole. 
This opening allowed Dr. Beaumont to observe 
digestion in the stomach as it happened. He conducted 
experiments on how diff erent foods were broken 
down and studied how emotions aff ect digestion.
Alexis St. Martin’s 
shotgun wound
Small Intestine
After its journey through the stomach, the partially 
digested food moves into the small intestine. Look 
at Fig. 9.4. It is a sketch of a stretched-out alimentary 
canal. Guess how long it is. You will be surprised 
that although it is called small intestine, it is almost 
6 metres long—almost twice the height of your 
classroom! You will be surprised to know that the 
small intestine is the longest part of the alimentary 
canal. 
The small intestine receives digestive secretions 
from three sources—the inner lining of the small 
intestine itself, and two more structures associated 
with the alimentary canal—the liver and the 
pancreas (Fig. 9.4). The liver secretes bile, which 
is mildly basic in nature. Recall the neutralisation 
reaction in chapter ‘Exploring Substances: Acidic, 
Basic, and Neutral’. Bile neutralises acids present 
in the food moving down from the stomach and 
breaks down fats into tiny droplets, making its 
digestion easier. 
Stomach
Mouth
Food pipe
(Oesophagus)
Pancreas
Small 
intestine
Liver
Large 
intestine
Anus
Fig. 9.4: Alimentary canal if it is 
stretched out
Chapter 9.indd 125 4/3/2025 4:55:10 PM
Reprint 2026-27
