Life Processes in Animals
129
9.2.1 Respiration in humans
You know that we breathe in (inhale) and breathe out (exhale) air 
continuously to obtain oxygen and release carbon dioxide. How 
is this oxygen used in the body? Are breathing and respiration 
diff erent? Let us fi nd out. 
How do we breathe?
The process of inhaling and exhaling air is called breathing. It is 
diffi cult to live without food for a week; without water for a day or 
two, but without breathing, we usually cannot survive more than a 
few minutes. Why is that? All of us are alive because we breathe. Not 
just humans, plants and other animals also breathe. But how do we 
breathe? 
Just as food follows a specifi c pathway in the digestive system, 
our body also has a specifi c system for breathing and respiration. 
This system is called respiratory system. The respiratory 
system consists of various parts as shown in Fig. 9.8. In this 
system, the exchange of gases follows a specifi c pathway. The 
pathway through which the air is inhaled and exhaled involves 
various parts of the respiratory system assisting in the process of 
breathing and respiration.
The respiratory system begins with a pair 
of nasal openings called nostrils through 
which we inhale and exhale air (Fig. 9.8). 
The inhaled air passes into a pair of small 
passages called the nasal passages. Have 
you noticed tiny hair inside your nostrils? 
These hair, along with mucus, help trap 
dust and dirt from the air we breathe in. 
This is why we should breathe through the 
nose and not through the mouth. From the 
nasal passages, the air reaches our lungs 
through the windpipe. The windpipe forms 
two branches, which enter the two lungs. 
In the lungs, these branches further divide into smaller and 
fi ner branches that end in small balloon-like sacs called alveoli 
(Fig. 9.8). Our lungs are protected by the rib cage. 
Rib cage
Left lung
Right lung
Diaphragm
Windpipe
Alveoli
Nostrils
Fig. 9.8: Human respiratory system
SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
While a lot of the dust is fi ltered out from the inhaled air, often 
small infectious particles can get through the lungs. For example, 
during the COVID-19 pandemic, the SARS-CoV-2 virus aff ected 
the respiratory system, leading to breathing diffi culties and 
often causing serious lung problems.
Chapter 9.indd 129 4/3/2025 4:55:14 PM
Reprint 2026-27
