Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
134
Thus, diff erent animals have diff erent breathing mechanisms 
to suit their unique habitats. Apart from the digestive system, the 
respiratory system, and the circulatory system, there are other 
systems which work in coordination with each other in the body 
and perform diff erent functions to sustain life. You will study 
about them in higher grades.
In a Nutshell
 Life processes such as nutrition, circulation, respiration, 
excretion, and reproduction are essential for the survival 
of living beings. These processes are collectively called life 
processes.
 The human digestive system consists of an alimentary canal 
which includes the mouth, oesophagus, stomach, small 
intestine, large intestine, and anus, and its associated parts, 
the liver and the pancreas. 
 The digested food is primarily absorbed through the walls of 
the small intestine. 
 The nutrients absorbed are distributed through the blood 
to diff erent parts of the body where they are used for 
performing various functions. 
 The large intestine absorbs most of the remaining water and 
some salts from the undigested food.
 Grass-eating animals such as cows and goats are called 
ruminants. They chew the food partially and swallow it. 
Later, the partially digested food is returned to the mouth, 
and the animal chews it thoroughly. 
 Breathing involves the movement of air into the lungs 
(inhalation) and out of the lungs (exhalation).
 The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide occurs in the 
alveoli of the lungs.
 Respiration uses oxygen from inhaled air to break down 
glucose into carbon dioxide and water. The process by which 
nutrients are converted into usable energy is called respiration.
 The circulatory system transports nutrients and oxygen to 
all parts of the body. It includes the heart, which pumps 
blood through blood vessels, delivering oxygen and nutrients 
while also removing waste from the body.
 Breathing is a physical process and respiration is a chemical 
process.
 Diff erent animals have diff erent breathing mechanisms 
adapted to suit their habitats.
Chapter 9.indd 134 4/3/2025 4:55:18 PM
Reprint 2026-27
