140
Understanding Society: 
India and Beyond 
Grade 9 – Part 1
and 18 days to draft the world’s longest written 
Constitution. Apart from the indigenous democratic 
traditions, the global spread of democratic values 
also influenced the Constituent Assembly’s 
Debates (CAD), contributing to the creation of a 
robust, flexible, transformative, and responsive 
constitution. 
The CAD reflects the members’ belief that the 
constitution should not be a rigid legal code, but 
a dynamic document capable of evolving through 
lawful amendments without compromising 
its fundamental values. Accordingly, while 
making provisions for establishing democratic 
institutions and processes that uphold liberty, 
equality, justice, and fraternity, the Constitution also provides 
for amendments under Article 368. This ensures that the 
Constitution remains flexible and responsive to the changing 
socio-political needs.
Principles of Democracy
A thriving democracy rests on certain non-negotiable principles. Let 
us study the essential principles of democracy that are upheld in 
India through various provisions of the Constitution. 
Popular Sovereignty
In a democracy, the ultimate source of power lies with the people. 
Thus, the idea of popular sovereignty means that the state derives its 
authority from the people.
A government elected through free and fair elections formulates 
policies and implements laws. Every citizen, 18 years of age and 
above has the right to vote through a secret ballot. This right is known 
as the Universal Adult Franchise. Citizens exercise their right to vote 
to elect governments and representatives. You will read more about 
elections in the next chapter. 
THINK ABOUT IT
 Why is it important that the ultimate source of power rests 
with the people in a democracy?
 How does people’s participation through voting strengthen
popular sovereignty? 
Fig. 6.3. Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar, Chairman of 
the Drafting Committee 
of the Constitution 
of India
Chapter 6.indd 140 18-Jun-26 12:00:45 PM
