142
Understanding Society: 
India and Beyond 
Grade 9 – Part 1
Separation of Powers
The separation of powers among the legislature, executive, and 
judiciary—each with distinct responsibilities—enables democratic 
institutions to function effectively and responsibly. The legislature 
makes laws, the executive implements them, and the judiciary 
interprets them, thereby preventing the concentration of power in 
any one organ. This separation is essential for maintaining checks and 
balances among the three organs of the government. For example, 
while parliament has the power to amend the Constitution, the 
judiciary can review such amendments to ensure they are consistent 
with the spirit of the Constitution. Similarly, the executive power of 
enforcement agencies is regulated by laws and rules framed by the 
Parliament and can also be reviewed by competent courts. If a law is 
inconsistent with the constitutional provisions, the judiciary has the 
power to declare it unconstitutional.
The judiciary upholds the Constitution and plays a vital role in 
protecting and promoting democratic values and the rights of all 
sections of the society. It ensures the laws enacted by the Parliament 
of India and the State Legislative Assemblies are in accordance with 
the Constitution. The judiciary is an impartial and independent 
institution that safeguards citizens’ rights and upholds the spirit 
of the Constitution. Important initiatives, such as Public Interest 
Litigation (PIL), have also been taken by the judiciary from time to 
time to ensure access to justice for all. 
THINK ABOUT IT
What do you think would happen if the same organ of the 
government made laws, implemented them, and enforced them? 
Share your thoughts with your classmates.
Accountability and Transparency
Democratic governments are accountable to citizens. Through 
elections, public debates, and engagement with civil society, citizens 
can evaluate the actions of the government. This continuous public 
involvement strengthens democracy and builds trust between 
the government and the people. Several institutional and policy 
frameworks ensure accountability and transparency in the Indian 
Public 
Interest 
Litigation: A 
legal action 
initiated in 
a court of 
law for the 
enforcement 
of public 
interest.
Chapter 6.indd 142 18-Jun-26 12:36:49 PM
