152
Understanding Society: 
India and Beyond 
Grade 9 – Part 1
women and children. It also conducted Mahila Sabhas and ensured 
adequate quorum in Gram Sabhas, with active participation from 
marginalised sections of the society, including Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, and women.
2. South Manubankul Gram Panchayat, Rupaichari Block, 
Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council, Tripura 
Women-Friendly Panchayat
The South Manubankul Gram Panchayat in Tripura functions as 
an active local government focused on improving people’s lives, 
especially those of women. It promotes women’s participation 
in decision-making and provides facilities related to health, 
sanitation, and livelihoods. The Panchayat organises community 
programmes, supports self-help groups, and ensures the effective 
implementation of government schemes for village development. 
It also works towards improving cleanliness, education, and 
social awareness. Owing to its strong focus on women’s welfare 
and inclusive development, it has been recognised as a “women￾friendly panchayat” at the national level by the Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj. 
Cases like these show that democracy in India is not limited to 
voting during elections. When citizens actively participate in 
grassroots and Panchayati Raj institutions, democracy becomes 
more responsive, inclusive, and effective at all levels.
Quorum: The 
presence of 
the minimum 
number of 
members in 
the meetings 
of an assembly 
to make the 
proceedings 
valid.
LET’S EXPLORE
A democratic system seeks to promote participation, ensure 
fairness, limit the concentration of power, and resolve 
disagreements peacefully. Identify examples from the above case 
study that reflect these features.
Democracy, however, is not limited to formal institutions of the 
government. The spirit of democratic functioning also extends into 
everyday social life. Civil society organisations, socio-religious and 
community institutions, cooperatives, and trade unions often adopt 
democratic decision-making methods.
Cooperatives: 
Groups formed 
by people to 
work together 
for a common 
benefit; 
members share 
profits and 
responsibilities 
equally.
Chapter 6.indd 152 18-Jun-26 12:00:51 PM
