155
6 – Democracy
behaviour, decision-making, and civic responsibility. Actions, such 
as damaging public property, spreading misinformation, or violating 
public rules weaken democratic values. Similarly, indifference 
towards public issues can adversely affect the health of a democracy. 
India has made significant progress in ensuring representation and 
participation. However, it continues to face several challenges, such 
as illiteracy, misinformation, and inequality. In recent times, the 
spread of fake news, especially through social media and other digital 
platforms, has emerged as a major concern. Such misinformation 
can influence public opinion, create confusion, and sometimes even 
lead to conflict. Issues like poverty, regionalism, gender inequality, 
and social discrimination also create barriers to equal participation. 
In addition, gaps in the effective implementation of laws and policies 
may reduce public trust in institutions.
LET’S EXPLORE
In small groups, identify two or three examples of information 
shared on social media that you believe may be misleading or false. 
Discuss what made you question their reliability and how such 
information can influence people’s opinions. Reflect on why access 
to accurate and authentic information is important in a democracy.
Emergency
One of the major challenges to democracy in India was recorded 
when an Emergency was imposed in 1975–77. In the early 1970s, 
public dissatisfaction with the government led by Indira Gandhi 
was growing. Rising unemployment, inflation, and allegations of 
misgovernance led to widespread protests. In June 1975, a National 
Emergency was imposed by the government on the grounds of 
internal disturbance. During this period, a majority of Fundamental 
Rights were suspended, the press was censored, and numerous 
political leaders and activists were arrested. Democratic institutions 
came under severe strain, and citizens’ freedom was restricted. 
Mass movements led by Jayaprakash Narayan—a political leader 
and socialist thinker, popularly known as Lok Nayak—mobilised 
students and citizens, especially in Bihar and Gujarat.
The Emergency was lifted in 1977, and general elections were 
held, allowing people to express their will through the ballot. 
The defeat of the ruling government demonstrated the strength 
of Indian democracy and highlighted the importance of 
Emergency:
Articles 352, 
356, and 
360 of the 
Constitution 
of India deal 
with the 
provisions for 
declaration 
of National 
Emergency, 
President’s 
Rule, and 
Financial 
Emergency, 
respectively.
Chapter 6.indd 155 20-Jun-26 10:38:32 AM
