Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6
10
Wow! It is 
amazing how 
each bird has 
its own unique 
chirp.
facilitate an exciting nature walk. Dr Raghu is a scientist at 
the nearby Research Laboratory and Maniram chacha is an 
elderly person from a nearby community. Maniram chacha
is an expert in mimicking bird calls. He is also brilliant at 
identifying a variety of plants and animals. 
To prepare them for the nature walk, Dr Raghu informs 
the students that the objective of this walk is to experience 
the beauty and variety of plants and animals in the nature. 
The students are excited to join them. They are curious 
to interact and learn from them. The teacher advises the 
students to carry a notebook, a pen and a water bottle.
As they walk, they begin exploring the plants and animals 
around them. Dr Raghu advises the students to notice the 
variety of smells in the park and emphasises respecting all 
living creatures and observing them without disturbing. 
Maniram chacha tells the students to not only observe different 
plants and animals but also to carefully listen to different 
sounds. The students come across a variety of plants, including 
grasses, bushes, and large trees. They also observe a variety 
of birds sitting on the branches of trees, butterflies moving 
from flower to flower and monkeys jumping from one tree 
to another. They record their observations in their notebooks 
and discuss them with Dr Raghu and Maniram chacha.
The students can hear the chirping of birds. Dr Raghu 
informs them that each bird has a unique chirp. This is an 
example of diversity in nature. Dr Raghu requests Maniram 
chacha to mimic calls of some birds. Maniram chacha
mimics different bird calls. The students enthusiastically 
start copying him.
Have you ever observed different plants and animals 
around you? Share and discuss your observations with your 
friends and teacher.
2.1 Diversity in Plants and Animals Around Us
Activity 2.1: Let us explore and record 
‹ Plan a nature walk with your teacher to a park or a 
nearby forest.
‹ While on the nature walk, observe different plants, 
insects, birds, and other animals. Also, note the weather 
conditions, whether it is hot, cold, windy and so on.
Chapter 2.indd 10 10/4/2024 3:17:55 PM
Reprint 2026-27
