Diversity in the Living World
11
‹ You can collect different types of fallen leaves or 
flowers and create a scrapbook. 
‹ Take care of the plants and animals in nature. Ensure 
that you do not disturb the plants and animals in the 
park. Do not pluck leaves and flowers. 
‹ Record your observations in Table 2.1 about the 
features of stems, leaves, flowers and anything 
interesting in various plants. Some examples have been 
given for you in Fig. 2.1 and Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Observations of different plants around us
S. no.
Local 
name of 
plant
Stem
Leaves (shape/ 
arrangement of 
leaves)
Flowers
Any other 
observations 
and features
1. Common 
grass
Soft and 
thin
A single leaf grows 
alternatively from 
different points on 
the stem
Green leaves
2. Tulsi Hard 
and thin
Arrangement of 
a pair of leaves 
in the opposite 
directions
Pinkish 
purple
3. Hibiscus Hard
4. Neem
Hard 
and 
thick
Leaves with 
smooth 
surface
5. Any other
facilitate an exciting nature walk. Dr Raghu is a scientist at 
the nearby Research Laboratory and Maniram chacha is an 
elderly person from a nearby community. Maniram chacha
is an expert in mimicking bird calls. He is also brilliant at 
identifying a variety of plants and animals. 
To prepare them for the nature walk, Dr Raghu informs 
the students that the objective of this walk is to experience 
the beauty and variety of plants and animals in the nature. 
The students are excited to join them. They are curious 
to interact and learn from them. The teacher advises the 
students to carry a notebook, a pen and a water bottle.
As they walk, they begin exploring the plants and animals 
around them. Dr Raghu advises the students to notice the 
variety of smells in the park and emphasises respecting all 
living creatures and observing them without disturbing. 
Maniram chacha tells the students to not only observe different 
plants and animals but also to carefully listen to different 
sounds. The students come across a variety of plants, including 
grasses, bushes, and large trees. They also observe a variety 
of birds sitting on the branches of trees, butterflies moving 
from flower to flower and monkeys jumping from one tree 
to another. They record their observations in their notebooks 
and discuss them with Dr Raghu and Maniram chacha.
The students can hear the chirping of birds. Dr Raghu 
informs them that each bird has a unique chirp. This is an 
example of diversity in nature. Dr Raghu requests Maniram 
chacha to mimic calls of some birds. Maniram chacha
mimics different bird calls. The students enthusiastically 
start copying him.
Have you ever observed different plants and animals 
around you? Share and discuss your observations with your 
friends and teacher.
2.1 Diversity in Plants and Animals Around Us
Activity 2.1: Let us explore and record 
‹ Plan a nature walk with your teacher to a park or a 
nearby forest.
‹ While on the nature walk, observe different plants, 
insects, birds, and other animals. Also, note the weather 
conditions, whether it is hot, cold, windy and so on.
Fig. 2.1: Examples of different features of some plants
(a) Grass (b) Tulsi (Holy Basil) (c) Hibiscus (Gudhal)
Chapter 2.indd 11 10/4/2024 3:18:06 PM
Reprint 2026-27
