Diversity in the Living World
19
Do you think that plants can be grouped on the basis of 
venation present in their leaves?
Now, let us try to explore roots of the plants. Do all plants 
have roots? Are these roots similar? 
Activity 2.6: Let us find out
‹ Visit an open area where wild herbs and grasses are 
growing. You may use small herbs for this exercise. 
‹ Using a khurpi (trowel), carefully dig out a few different 
herbs without damaging the roots. To do this, you may 
wet the soil and loosen it. 
‹ Wash the roots with water and observe them. 
‹ After you are done observing, make sure to replant the 
herbs so that they may continue to thrive and grow.
What are the similarities and differences in the roots of 
the plants collected by you? What differences do you see in 
the roots of plants shown in Fig. 2.5a and Fig. 2.5b?
Is there any relation between the type of leaf venation 
and the type of root of the same plant? How do we find 
this out?
Activity 2.7: Let us relate and analyse
‹ Collect saplings of five common plants from your school 
nursery or any other nurseries to plant in your school 
garden. Examples of such plants can include lemongrass, 
marigold, sadabahar (periwinkle), and others. 
‹ Before planting them, observe their roots and the 
venation in their leaves. 
‹ Record your observations in Table 2.4. 
Table 2.4: Types of leaf venation and roots
S. no. Name of the 
plant
Type of leaf 
venation 
(reticulate/
parallel) 
Type of root 
(fibrous/tap)
1. Lemongrass Parallel Fibrous
2.
3.
4.
5.
Do you observe any relation between the leaf venation 
and types of root in these plants? A sadabahar plant has 
a taproot and its leaves have reticulate venation. Do 
other plants with reticulate venation have taproots too? 
Lemongrass, on the other hand, has fibrous roots and its 
leaves have parallel venation. Do other plants with parallel 
venation have fibrous roots too? Generally, plants with 
reticulate venation have taproots while those with parallel 
venation have fibrous roots. 
Chickpea (chana) is another example of a plant with 
taproots and reticulate venation in leaves. Wheat is an 
example of a plant with fibrous roots and parallel venation 
in its leaves. 
Chapter 2.indd 19 10/4/2024 3:19:55 PM
Reprint 2026-27
