398 MATHEMATICS
Optimal (feasible) solution: Any point in the feasible region that gives the optimal
value (maximum or minimum) of the objective function is called an optimal solution.
Now, we see that every point in the feasible region OABC satisfies all the constraints
as given in (1) to (4), and since there are infinitely many points, it is not evident how
we should go about finding a point that gives a maximum value of the objective function
Z = 250x + 75y. To handle this situation, we use the following theorems which are
fundamental in solving linear programming problems. The proofs of these theorems
are beyond the scope of the book.
Theorem 1 Let R be the feasible region (convex polygon) for a linear programming
problem and let Z = ax + by be the objective function. When Z has an optimal value
(maximum or minimum), where the variables x and y are subject to constraints described
by linear inequalities, this optimal value must occur at a corner point* (vertex) of the
feasible region.
Theorem 2 Let R be the feasible region for a linear programming problem, and let
Z = ax + by be the objective function. If R is bounded**, then the objective function
Z has both a maximum and a minimum value on R and each of these occurs at a
corner point (vertex) of R.
Remark If R is unbounded, then a maximum or a minimum value of the objective
function may not exist. However, if it exists, it must occur at a corner point of R.
(By Theorem 1).
In the above example, the corner points (vertices) of the bounded (feasible) region
are: O, A, B and C and it is easy to find their coordinates as (0, 0), (20, 0), (10, 50) and
(0, 60) respectively. Let us now compute the values of Z at these points.
We have
* A corner point of a feasible region is a point in the region which is the intersection of two boundary lines.
** A feasible region of a system of linear inequalities is said to be bounded if it can be enclosed within a
circle. Otherwise, it is called unbounded. Unbounded means that the feasible region does extend
indefinitely in any direction.
Vertex of the Corresponding value
Feasible Region of Z (in Rs)
O (0,0) 0
C (0,60) 4500
B (10,50) 6250
A (20,0) 5000
← Maximum
Reprint 2026-27
