The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 envisages a system of 
education in the country that is rooted in an Indian ethos and 
its civilisational accomplishments in all fields of knowledge and 
human endeavour. At the same time, it aims to prepare students to 
engage constructively with the opportunities and challenges of the 
twenty-first century. The basis for this aspirational vision has been 
well laid out by the National Curriculum Framework for School 
Education (NCF-SE) 2023 across curricular areas at all stages. By 
nurturing students’ inherent abilities across all five planes of human 
existence (pañchakośhas), the Foundational and Preparatory Stages 
set the Stage for further learning at the Middle Stage. Spanning Grades 
6 to 8, the Middle Stage serves as a critical three-year bridge between 
the Preparatory and Secondary Stages.
The NCF-SE 2023, at the Middle Stage, aims to equip students 
with the skills that are needed to grow, as they advance in their 
lives. It strives to enhance their analytical, descriptive, and 
narrative capabilities, and to prepare them for the challenges and 
opportunities that await them. A diverse curriculum, covering 
nine subjects ranging from three languages—including at least two 
languages native to India—to Science, Mathematics, Social Sciences, 
Art Education, Physical Education and Well-being, and Vocational 
Education promotes their holistic development.
Such a transformative learning culture requires certain essential 
conditions. One of them is to have appropriate textbooks in different 
curricular areas, as these textbooks are intended to play a central role 
in mediating between content and pedagogy—a role that helps strike 
a judicious balance between direct instruction and opportunities 
for exploration and inquiry. Among other conditions, classroom 
arrangement and teacher preparation are crucial to establish 
conceptual connections both within and across curricular areas.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training, on 
its part, is committed to providing students with such high-quality 
textbooks. Various Curricular Area Groups, which have been 
constituted for this purpose, comprising notable subject-experts, 
pedagogues, and practising teachers as their members, have 
made all possible efforts to develop such textbooks. The Curiosity,
textbook of science for Grade 8 is designed to make learning fun, 
engaging, and meaningful. Aligned with the NEP 2020 and the 
NCF-SE 2023, the textbook promotes experiential and inquiry-based 
learning. It encourages students to ask questions, think critically, 
Foreword
0_Prelims.indd 3 6/30/2025 1:56:08 PM
Reprint 2026-27
