After exploring the Curiosity, Grade 7 textbook, we hope you discovered 
new ideas and found yourself wondering even more about the world 
around you! Our journey of exploration continues in Curiosity
for Grade 8, where you will learn to ask deeper questions, design 
investigations, and think like real scientists. 
The Grade 8 textbook of science has been developed in alignment 
with the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 and the National 
Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF-SE) 2023. It is 
expected that all competencies outlined for the final year of Middle 
Stage (Grade 8) are achieved. This textbook is designed to help you learn 
about important topics, such as matter, the physical and living world, 
health, hygiene, and the connection between science, technology, and 
society. It also helps you understand how science works and how 
scientists think and explore. The main aim of Curiosity is to help you 
become a responsible and thoughtful member of society.
The textbook integrates topics from biology, chemistry, physics, 
and earth science. It also incorporates essential themes, such as 
environmental care, value education, inclusivity, health, hygiene, and 
India’s traditional knowledge systems. The goal is to help you learn 
through real experiences rather than by simply memorising facts. 
Curiosity, the textbook of science for Grade 8, contains 13 chapters. 
Each chapter includes engaging activities, thought-provoking 
questions, and clear illustrations to support your learning. The first 
chapter is titled Exploring the Investigative World of Science. 
It gives you a quick look at the various topics you will come across 
in this book and is designed to get you more 
excited about science! This chapter takes you 
to the next step—entering the investigative 
world of science, where curiosity, wonder, 
and discovery come together. You will learn 
to ask focused questions, design and try out 
simple experiments to help answer them, 
and use your observation, exploration, and 
investigation skills to understand how things work. This chapter 
is meant to be a fun and friendly introduction to your science journey. 
Each chapter begins with a picture linked to the chapter that is 
designed to spark curiosity, capture your attention, and connect prior 
knowledge to new concepts. There are a few Probe and ponder
questions. These are critical thinking questions that are not for 
evaluation and do not always have simple answers. Instead, they 
make you think more deeply and explore new ideas. Some of these 
About this Book
Probe and ponder
Dear Young Scientists,
0_Prelims.indd 5 6/30/2025 1:56:09 PM
Reprint 2026-27
