vi
To sustain the students’ interest, 
some challenging ideas, additional 
information, interesting facts, and 
other engaging materials are presented 
in boxes labelled Ever heard of ..., 
which highlight fascinating facts, 
interesting observations, and curiosity￾driven questions.
A step further boxes contain 
advanced concepts that explore 
the topic in more depth. The 
information given in these boxes 
also brings scientific principles 
and knowledge into real-life 
questions are open-ended and thought-provoking because they do 
not just ask for a fact or a quick answer. Instead, they ask why or 
how, encouraging you to think critically and stay curious. You may 
not always be able to find the answers to these questions even after 
going through the chapter, but do not worry. 
They will help you link different concepts and 
deepen your curiosity, and perhaps help you 
understand the process of science. Many of 
these questions will also be explored further 
in higher grades. In fact, we are sure you may 
also have such questions, and there is space to 
add your own!
The activities in the book are designed to reflect how science 
works, offering both hands-on and minds-on experiences. These 
activities promote teamwork and are inclusive in nature, ensuring 
participation from all students. Teachers are expected to pay extra 
attention while supporting children with special needs, especially 
during experiments involving light, heating devices, microscopes, etc. 
Teachers should assist these students in visualising the experimental 
setup. Additionally, they may encourage peer interactions to help 
students understand concepts of science better. The text also includes 
questions to help students assess their understanding and reflect 
how much they have learnt. Many of these questions are aimed at 
encouraging students to think deeply, reflect on their own ideas, and 
analyse concepts critically.
In some activities Safety first, has 
been given to keep students safe, 
especially when using hot, sharp, or 
breakable materials. These precautions 
help prevent accidents and make sure 
everyone can enjoy the activity while 
learning safely. 
Safety first
Ever heard of ...
Probe and ponder
Share your questions
 ?
A step further
0_Prelims.indd 6 6/30/2025 1:56:11 PM
Reprint 2026-27
