Heat Transfer in Nature
91
You observed that the pin closest to the candle fl ame (pin I) 
falls fi rst, followed by pins II, III, and IV. Why does pin I fall before 
pin II? Why did all the pins not fall together? 
From your observations, what can you infer? Do you think 
that heat is being transferred along the metal strip from the 
end that is being heated? As the heat travels along the strip and 
approaches a pin, the wax holding it melts and the pin falls. Here, 
the transfer of heat takes place from the hot end of the strip to the 
colder end. The process of heat transfer from the hotter part of 
an object to the colder part is called conduction. In this process, 
the particle that gets heated, passes the heat on to its neighbour, 
and so on. However, the particles themselves do not move from 
their positions. 
Materials like metals that allow heat to pass through them 
easily are called good conductors of heat. Because metals are 
good conductors of heat, we use utensils made of metals for 
cooking. In solids, heat transfer takes place mainly through the 
process of conduction.
If we use a strip made of a material like wood or glass in place 
of a metal strip to perform Activity 7.1, the pins will not fall. Can 
you think of the reason for this based on our learning from the 
chapter ‘The World of Metals and Non-Metals’? 
Materials such as glass and wood do not 
allow heat to pass through them easily and 
are poor conductors (insulators) of heat. 
Clay and porcelain are also poor conductors 
of heat — that is why tea or coff ee kept in 
such cups stays hot longer.
List some materials around you and 
classify them as good or poor conductors 
of heat in Table 7.2. 
Table 7.2: List of good or poor conductors of heat
S.No. Material
1. Steel Good conductor
2. Wood
Good or Poor conductor of heat
Does your list include air? If it is there on the list, where have 
you placed it? 
You must have experienced that during winters, we prefer 
wearing woollen clothes to keep ourselves warm.
chapter ‘The World of Metals and Non-Metals’? 
Now, I know, why we 
generally use metal 
utensils for cooking, 
whereas we prefer clay 
and porcelain cups for 
drinking tea or coff ee.
3.
Chapter 7.indd 91 4/3/2025 4:53:57 PM
Reprint 2026-27
