Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
94
7.2.1 Land and Sea Breeze
Palden shares his experience of visiting a beach in Kerala during 
winter vacation and says, “During the day, the sand or soil near 
the beach is hotter than the water in the sea. However, at night, 
the sand or soil is cooler than the water.” Pema replies, “Yes, 
diff erent objects get heated and cooled diff erently.” 
Let us check how land and water get heated and cooled by 
performing an activity. 
Activity 7.4: Let us investigate
Caution— This activity should be carried out on a clear, 
sunny day under the supervision of a teacher or an adult.
 Take two identical bowls as shown in Fig. 7.6.
 Fill one bowl halfway with soil and the other bowl 
halfway with water. 
 Fix a laboratory thermometer in each bowl as 
shown in Fig. 7.6. Make sure that the bulbs of the 
thermometer are immersed in soil and water, and 
do not touch the bottoms or the sides of the bowls.
 Place the set-up in sunlight. Fig. 7.6: Measurement of the 
temperature of soil and water
Soil
Stand
Water
Thermometer
 Observe the movement of the coloured streak in the 
water.
 As you supply heat, a streak of colour starts moving 
up and then coming down from the sides (Fig. 7.5b).
Why does the streak of coloured water go up in the 
middle and come down from the sides? The water at the 
bottom of the beaker gets heated up and becomes hot. 
It expands, becomes lighter, and rises. The water on the 
sides of the beaker is comparatively cooler and heavier, 
and comes down to take the place of the rising water. 
Then, this water gets heated and in turn also rises.
This cycle continues until the entire volume of water 
gets heated. In this case, the entire volume of water gets 
heated through the actual movement of water particles. 
This process of heat transfer is known as convection. It 
is because of convection that we see the movement of the 
coloured streak inside the beaker.
Thus, we can conclude that water, like air, gets heated 
up by the process of convection. Here, heat transfer takes 
place by the actual movement of particles of liquids and 
gases from one place to another. Fig. 7.5(b): Demonstration of 
convection in heated water
Fig. 7.5(a): Initial set-up 
for demonstration 
Straw
Beaker
Water
Candle
Coloured 
streak
Burning 
candle
Tripod 
stand
Chapter 7.indd 94 4/3/2025 4:54:01 PM
Reprint 2026-27
