Heat Transfer in Nature
97
There are many examples in our daily life, where we can 
observe conduction, convection, and radiation happening 
together.
Consider the case of water being heated up, as 
shown in Fig. 7.8. Let us identify the various ways in 
which the pan and the water get heated up, as well 
as the warmth we feel around the fl ame and the hot 
pan. Heat is transferred from the fl ame to the utensil 
by conduction. Subsequently, water in the utensil 
gets heated up by convection. The warmth that we 
feel around the fl ame and the hot utensil is due to 
radiation.
Let us wrap up!
From the activities, examples, and discussions so far, we fi nd that 
there are three processes by which heat gets transferred. These 
are conduction, convection, and radiation. 
 In conduction, heating takes place when one particle receives 
heat, transfers heat to the next particle in contact, and so 
on. The particles themselves do not move away from their 
positions.
 In convection, heat transfer takes place by the actual 
movement of particles. 
 Note that in conduction and convection, a medium must be 
present whose particles help in the transfer of heat. 
 In the case of radiation, heat travels from one place to 
another and no material medium is required for its transfer.
FASCINATING FACTS
In the upper reaches of the Himalayan 
region, a traditional room heater locally 
known as bukhari is used to keep rooms 
warm during winters. It consists of an iron 
stove in which wood or charcoal is burnt. 
A long pipe attached to the upper part of 
the heater serves as a chimney, venting 
out the smoke. Additionally, the bukhari
can be used for cooking, as its fl at top 
provides a platform for placing utensils. 
All the three processes of heat transfer 
are involved when this device is used for 
cooking and warming up the room. 
In the upper reaches of the Himalayan 
region, a traditional room heater locally 
 is used to keep rooms 
warm during winters. It consists of an iron 
stove in which wood or charcoal is burnt. 
A long pipe attached to the upper part of 
the heater serves as a chimney, venting 
bukhari
can be used for cooking, as its fl at top 
provides a platform for placing utensils. 
All the three processes of heat transfer 
are involved when this device is used for 
Bukhari
Fig. 7.8: Heating water in a pan
Chapter 7.indd 97 4/3/2025 4:54:04 PM
Reprint 2026-27
