Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
98
You have learnt in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity, that 
the Sun is the main source of heat for the Earth. You have seen 
your parents drying wet clothes on the clothesline at home. Wet 
clothes dry faster on a sunny day since the heat from the Sun 
makes the evaporation of water faster. 
Thus, heat from the Sun plays an important role in the 
evaporation of water, be it from clothes drying on a line or from 
water bodies like oceans and lakes. Let us look at the phenomenon 
of water cycle to understand this in more detail.
7.4 Water Cycle
You have also learnt in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity, 
that water exists in three states in nature. As a liquid, it fi lls 
the oceans, rivers, and lakes on the Earth. As a solid, it forms 
snow, ice sheets, and glaciers in the mountains and the polar 
regions. As a gas, it exists in the form of water vapour in the 
Earth’s atmosphere. During summers, some of the snow and 
ice gets converted to water due to the Sun’s radiation and fl ows 
down as rivers, and ultimately into the oceans. The melted ice is 
replenished by fresh snow during winters. 
Water in the oceans, 
rivers, and lakes gets 
heated due to the Sun, and 
as a result, it evaporates 
as water vapour. Water 
also evaporates from 
trees and plants through 
transpiration. 
When water vapour 
rises up, it cools down 
and condenses to form 
clouds. Clouds bring 
rain, snow, and hail. 
This process is called 
precipitation. 
The continuous movement of water — upward as water vapour 
and downward through precipitation, passing through soil, rocks, 
and plants, and fi nally returning to water bodies, is called water 
cycle (Fig. 7.9). Thus, the water cycle helps in redistributing and 
replenishing water in rivers, lakes, and oceans. It also serves to 
conserve the total amount of water on the Earth. Rainwater that 
falls on the surface of the Earth, fl ows into ponds, lakes, rivers, 
and oceans or seeps into the ground.
Fig. 7.9: Water cycle
Sun
Evaporation
Condensation Precipitation
Transpiration
Chapter 7.indd 98 4/3/2025 4:54:04 PM
Reprint 2026-27
