Q.5. Faiz prepared a frequency distribution table of data on the number of wickets taken 
by Jaspreet Bumrah in his last 30 matches:
a. What information is this table giving?
b. What may be the title of this table?
c. What caught your attention in this table?
d. In how many matches has Bumrah taken 4 wickets?
e. Mayank says “If we want to know the total number of wickets he has taken in his 
last 30 matches, we have to add the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3 …, up to 7.” Can Mayank 
get the total number of wickets taken in this way? Why?
f. How would you correctly figure out the total number of wickets taken by Bumrah 
in his last 30 matches, using this table?
Ans. a. This table is giving the information about different number of wickets taken by 
Jaspreet Bumrah in different number of matches. 
b. The title of this table may be: Wickets Taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in Last 30 
Matches.(think of more!)
c. In this table, attention seeking point is that in 1 match 7 wickets were taken by 
Jaspreet Bumrah only.(think of more!)
d. In 3 matches Bumrah has taken 4 wickets.
e. No, Mayank can’t get the total number of wickets taken in this way. For example, 3 
wickets per match were taken in 8 matches, which means total 24 wickets were taken.
f. To know the total number of wickets, prepare a next column of total wickets .It will 
have products of corresponding numbers of the two given columns. Then the sum of 
the numbers in the 3
rd column, will be the total number of wickets. Total number of 
wickets =90 
Q.6. The following pictograph shows the number of tractors in five different villages.
Observe the pictograph and answer the following questions—
a. Which village has the smallest number of tractors?
b. Which village has the most tractors?
c. How many more tractors does Village C have than Village B?
d. Komal says, “Village D has half the number of tractors as Village E.” Is she right?
Ans. a. Village D. 
b. Village C.
c. 3.
d. Yes 
Q.7. The number of girl students in each class of a school is depicted by a pictograph:
Observe this pictograph and answer the following questions:
a. Which class has the least number of girl students?
b. What is the difference between the number of girls in Classs 5 and 6?
c. If 2 more girls were admitted in Class 2, how would the graph change?
d. How many girls are there in Class 7?
Ans. a. Class 8.
b. 6.
