Curiosity Textbook of Science Grade 7
170
12.1 Rotation of the Earth
You might have also noticed that the Sun rises in the East and sets in 
the West. Have you ever wondered why? Let us try to understand 
why. Have you ever enjoyed riding a merry-go-round at a park or 
at your school? Let us go back to riding a merry-go-round!
Activity 12.1: Let us explore
 Sit on a merry-go-round facing towards the outer side as 
shown in Fig. 12.1.
Fig. 12.1: A girl observing objects around 
her while riding a merry-go-round
 Ask someone to turn the merry-go￾round slowly in the anti-clockwise 
direction as shown in Fig. 12.1. While 
you are sitting on the moving merry￾go-round, look around you. Do the 
objects around you appear to be 
moving? In which direction do they 
appear to be moving? 
While you turn in the anti-clockwise 
direction, the objects appear to turn 
around you in the opposite direction, that 
is, in the clockwise direction.
 Now fi x your gaze at a particular tree 
(or a building) ahead of you while 
sitting on the merry- go-round turning 
around in anti-clockwise direction.
In which direction do you fi nd the tree turning around you? Is 
it in your view all the time?
The tree appears to turn around you in the opposite direction, 
that is, the clockwise direction. The tree appears in your view 
from your left-hand side and then moves out of your view on the 
right-hand side when you view it from a merry-go-round turning 
around in anti-clockwise direction.
Using the observations made by us while riding a merry-go￾round, let us now think. When we view from the Earth, the Sun 
appears in the East, moves across the sky from the East to the West 
and disappears in the West. Does it indicate that the Sun is moving 
in the sky? Or might it be that the Earth itself is turning around 
and the Sun just appears to move?
The fact is that the Sun appears to be moving because we view 
it from the Earth, which is turning around itself. 
Chapter 12.indd 170 4/3/2025 4:57:12 PM
Reprint 2026-27
