Earth, Moon, and the Sun
173
Now imagine that you are standing on the Equator on the 
Earth and watching the sky during one rotation of the Earth while 
it rotates from West to East. What will you observe? Will your 
observation be the same as that of the girl shown in Fig. 12.6? 
Fig. 12.6: A girl on the rotating Earth viewing the Sun from the Equator 
2. Around noon, I have rotated to a new 
position where the Sun is now over my head.
3. By evening, I have 
rotated further. The Sun 
has started to disappear 
from my view to the left 
from the West. The stars 
will now become visible 
in the night sky.
1. I am facing North 
and my back is to the 
South. The morning Sun 
appears in my view to 
my right in the East.
East West
East West
East West
Due to the rotation of the Earth, the Sun appears to rise in the 
eastward direction, move across the sky from the East to the West 
and set in the westward direction (Fig. 12.6). Then the night begins 
and the stars become visible in the sky.
FASCINATING FACTS
In an earlier chapter ‘Measurement of Time and 
Motion’, you learnt how the scientist Galileo 
discovered an important property of a pendulum, 
and in the seventeenth century, another scientist, 
Huygens, used that property to make pendulum 
clocks that measured time. In the middle of 
nineteenth century, another scientist, Leon 
Foucault, used a long pendulum to give the fi rst 
simple demonstration of the Earth’s rotation. The 
pendulum, known as a Foucault pendulum in his 
honour, consists of a long string with a heavy bob, 
suspended from a high ceiling.
A Foucault pendulum with a length of 22 metres 
has been hung from a skylight in the Constitution 
Hall of the new Parliament building in New Delhi, 
India. It symbolises the integration of the idea of 
India with the vastness of the cosmos.
pendulum, known as a Foucault pendulum in his 
honour, consists of a long string with a heavy bob, 
suspended from a high ceiling.
has been hung from a skylight in the Constitution 
Hall of the new Parliament building in New Delhi, 
India. It symbolises the integration of the idea of 
India with the vastness of the cosmos.
Chapter 12.indd 173 4/3/2025 4:57:16 PM
Reprint 2026-27
