Curiosity Textbook of Science Grade 7
174
Yes, indeed! Let us look at the 
stars in the night sky to see the 
eff ect of Earth’s rotation.
Activity 12.3: Let us explore
 On an early evening between March and May, identify the 
Big Dipper (Saptarishi), and the Pole Star (Dhruva Tara), if 
visible, as you did in the chapter ‘Beyond Earth’ in the Grade 6 
Science textbook Curiosity.
 Note down your location and date 
of your night sky observations. 
The activity must be carried out 
on the same night.
 Draw the orientation of the Big 
Dipper in the sky with respect 
to the Pole Star (or a fi xed 
tree/building on the ground 
in a direction towards the Big 
Dipper if you cannot see the 
Pole Star). Mark the time of your 
observation along with your 
sketch as shown in Fig. 12.7. 
 After two hours, observe the Big Dipper again. Has it moved? 
Again, draw its orientation and note down the time.
 Repeat the above step after two hours. Do you observe that 
the Big Dipper appears to move around the Pole Star (notice 
just the movement even if you cannot see the Pole Star)? 
The Earth’s axis of rotation points very close to the Pole Star in 
the Northern Hemisphere. Therefore, the Pole Star appears nearly 
stationary in the sky from the Earth. All the stars appear to move 
around it. Just like the Sun, the Moon also appears to rise in the 
eastward direction and set in the westward direction because the 
Earth rotates from West to East.
FASCINATING FACTS
Astrophotographers take long exposure 
photographs, keeping the camera’s 
shutter open for a long time. In such 
a photograph, the apparent motion of 
the stars is recorded as arcs of a circle, 
known as star trails. 
(Picture taken from Mahuli, Maharashtra)
photographs, keeping the camera’s 
shutter open for a long time. In such 
a photograph, the apparent motion of 
the stars is recorded as arcs of a circle, 
Fig. 12.7: Illustrative sketch of Big Dipper (for activity 12.3) 
by a student located in Pune on the night of 1–2 April
3 AM
5 AM
1 AM 11 PM
9 PM
7 PM
Northeast
North Northwest
Since the Earth is rotating, 
shouldn’t the stars also 
appear to move in the sky 
like the Sun?
Chapter 12.indd 174 4/3/2025 4:57:17 PM
Reprint 2026-27
