Earth, Moon, and the Sun
179
In the Northern Hemisphere, the longest day occurs around 
21 June—this is known as summer solstice. After the summer 
solstice, the duration of a day becomes shorter while that of a 
night becomes longer. The shortest day and longest night in this 
Hemisphere occur around 22 December known as the winter 
solstice. Around 21 March and 23 September, the daytime lasts 
for 12 hours. In the Northern Hemisphere, these days are called 
the spring and the autumn equinox, respectively.
DIVE
EEPER
FASCINATING FACTS
At the North Pole, the Sun rises in the East direction on the equinox 
day — 21 March, and remains continuously in the sky for six months. 
The Sun sets on 22 September. The South Pole experiences the opposite 
behaviour. The polar regions thus experience continuous sunshine for 
six months followed by a six-month period of darkness.
FASCINATING FACTS
At the North Pole, the Sun rises in the East direction on the equinox 
day — 21 March, and remains continuously in the sky for six months. 
The Sun sets on 22 September. The South Pole experiences the opposite 
behaviour. The polar regions thus experience continuous sunshine for 
six months followed by a six-month period of darkness.
On the equator, there is always 12 hours of sunlight and 12 
hours of darkness. There is little diff erence in the intensity of the 
sunrays falling on the equator in diff erent months. Thus, for the 
southern states of India that lie close to the equator, the eff ect 
of seasons is not very prominent. Other eff ects, such as local 
geographical features and proximity to oceans or seas, can also 
infl uence these broader patterns seen in the two hemispheres, as 
you have learnt in social science. 
12.3 Eclipses
Day and night cycle, seasons, the life 
on the Earth... so much is dependent 
upon the Sun. Could the light from the 
Sun get blocked by the two planets
which are revolving between the 
Earth and the Sun?
The planets Mercury and Venus appear very small compared to 
the Sun, and never block the entire light from the Sun reaching 
us. However, you may be surprised to know that the Moon can 
do that. Do you remember studying in Grade 6 that the Moon is a 
natural satellite of the Earth and it revolves around the Earth as 
the Earth revolves around the Sun? 
Chapter 12.indd 179 4/3/2025 4:57:23 PM
Reprint 2026-27
