Curiosity Textbook of Science Grade 7
180
12.3.1 Solar eclipse
At certain times, the Moon can come in between the Sun and the 
Earth in a way that obstructs the light from the Sun from reaching 
us. This is known as a solar eclipse. You may wonder how the 
Moon, which is smaller than the Sun, blocks the light coming from 
the Sun that we see in the sky. 
Activity 12.4: Let us explore
 Ask your friend to stand in front of you at a distance of about 
5 metres. Consider his head to be the Sun.
 Now close one eye and show a thumbs up with your 
outstretched hand towards your friend as shown in Fig. 12.12. 
Are you able to cover the entire head of your friend with your 
thumb?
You can cover the entire head of your friend 
with the help of your thumb, even though your 
thumb is much smaller than the actual size of 
your friend’s head. How could it be? The size of 
any object as seen by your eye — also known as 
apparent size — depends upon both its actual 
physical size and its distance from you. The 
thumb being much closer to you as compared to 
your friend, the apparent sizes of your thumb and 
your friend’s head as seen by you in Activity 12.4 
are similar.
The apparent sizes of the Moon and the Sun in the sky are 
similar when viewed from the Earth. This is so because though 
the Moon is much smaller in physical size than the Sun, the Moon 
is much closer to us compared to the Sun. Therefore, the Moon 
can appear to cover the entire Sun as viewed from the Earth.
Though the planets Mercury and Venus are much larger than 
the Moon in size, they are also much farther from the Earth as 
compared to the Moon. Thus, their apparent sizes are very much 
smaller than the Sun and they cannot block the Sun. For example, 
when Venus passes between the Sun and the Earth, it appears as 
a tiny black dot passing against the bright face of the Sun. This 
event, known as a Transit of Venus, is a rare event.
DIVE
EEPER the Moon in size, they are also much farther from the Earth as 
compared to the Moon. Thus, their apparent sizes are very much 
smaller than the Sun and they cannot block the Sun. For example, 
when Venus passes between the Sun and the Earth, it appears as 
a tiny black dot passing against the bright face of the Sun. This 
event, known as a Transit of Venus, is a rare event.
DIVE
EEPER
Figure 12.13 shows the arrangement of the Sun, the Moon, and 
the Earth during a solar eclipse. The shadow of the Moon falls on 
a small area on the surface of the Earth as seen in Fig. 12.13. This 
area is in total darkness, and no part of the Sun can be seen from 
there. The observers in this area witness a total solar eclipse 
(Fig. 12.14a).
Fig. 12.12: Trying to cover a 
friend’s head with the thumb
Chapter 12.indd 180 4/3/2025 4:57:24 PM
Reprint 2026-27
