Curiosity Textbook of Science Grade 7
182
This activity, similar to Activity 11.5, is to be set up by your 
teacher. A mirror can be used to project an image of the 
Sun onto a wall. However, holding it at the correct angle 
throughout a solar eclipse can be diffi cult. To solve this, make 
a movable stand for the mirror. Use a hollow ball with a small 
hole, half-fi ll it with sand (to keep it stable), and attach a small 
mirror (such as an embroidery mirror) to it. Place the ball on 
a circular ring, like an adhesive tape ring, so it can be turned 
around easily. Adjust it until the Sun’s image appears on a 
wall or screen. Fig. 12.15 shows this set-up where the mirror 
is fi xed to a green ball.
Caution — This activity should be performed strictly under 
supervision of a teacher. Take care not to direct the refl ected 
light beam in anyone’s eyes.
This activity, similar to Activity 11.5, is to be set up by your 
teacher. A mirror can be used to project an image of the 
Sun onto a wall. However, holding it at the correct angle 
throughout a solar eclipse can be diffi cult. To solve this, make 
a movable stand for the mirror. Use a hollow ball with a small 
DIVE
EEPER
People have observed eclipses and maintained records since 
ancient times. When the reasons for eclipses were not known, they 
feared the occurrence of eclipses. As you can imagine, something 
blocking the Sun, the main source of heat and light on the Earth, 
even for a brief period of time, would have been extremely 
concerning. Many superstitions were attached to solar eclipses in 
various parts of the world related to the activities that could not 
be carried out during eclipses—such as eating, cooking, or going 
out of home. But now that we know the reason why a solar eclipse 
occurs, we need not fear these events as long as we do not look at 
the Sun directly. In fact, scientists go around the world to observe 
the eclipses from wherever these are observable. The eclipses 
provide them an opportunity to study phenomena that cannot be 
observed otherwise.
FASCINATING FACTS
An eclipse is known as grahan in Sanskrit and in many Indian languages. 
Many ancient Indian astronomical texts provide calculations to 
predict eclipses. The best known and most referred text is the Surya
Siddhanta, which is written in the classical Sanskrit poetry tradition 
in rhythmic shlokas.
12.3.2 Lunar eclipse
As the Moon revolves around the Earth, sometimes the Earth can 
block the sunlight from reaching the Moon. This is known as a 
lunar eclipse. On such days, we see the Earth’s shadow falling on 
the full disc of the Moon. Fig. 12.16 shows the arrangement of the 
Sun, the Earth, and the Moon during a lunar eclipse. 
Chapter 12.indd 182 4/3/2025 4:57:27 PM
Reprint 2026-27
