Curiosity Textbook of Science Grade 7
186
9. The Moon is much smaller than the Sun, yet it can block the 
Sun completely from our view during a total solar eclipse. 
Why is it possible?
10. The Indian cricket team matches in Australia are often held 
in December. Should they pack winter or summer clothes for 
their trip?
11. Why do you think lunar eclipses can be seen from a large 
part of the Earth when they happen, but total solar eclipse 
can be seen by only a small part of the Earth?
12. If the Earth’s axis were not tilted with respect to the axis of 
revolution, explain what would be the eff ect on seasons?
Exploratory Projects
 Repeat Activity 12.2 but replace the torch with an electric 
lamp. Then place the globe at diff erent positions on a circle 
around the lamp while maintaining the tilt of the globe.
(i) Note down your observations regarding how much of 
the Northern and Southern hemispheres of the globe are 
illuminated at diff erent positions.
(ii) Rotate the globe and take a note of the length of the day 
and night on diff erent parts of the globe.
(iii) Repeat (ii) for diff erent positions of globe on the circle.
 The Earth goes around the Sun in an oval-shaped path. 
Draw two circles with the same centre, one with a radius of 
14.7 cm, and another one with a radius of 15.2 cm. If 1 cm 
corresponds to 10 million km, the two circles represent the 
closest and farthest distances from the Sun. Note how small 
is the diff erence between these two distances.
 Suppose the tilt of the Earth’s axis of rotation increases. Will 
it cause more extreme seasons? Find out if the tilt of Uranus 
is more than the Earth and about the seasons there. Write an 
interesting article for a newspaper or your school magazine 
about it. 
In reality, the planets move around a special point in 
the solar system, which is very close to the Sun but 
not exactly at its centre! The Sun also moves around 
the same point a little instead of staying perfectly still. 
Scientists use such tiny wobbles in the movement of 
other stars to discover exoplanets around them!
DIVE
EEPER
Disciplinary Inter
Society
Art
Economy
Geography
Technology
History
Chapter 12.indd 186 4/3/2025 4:57:32 PM
Reprint 2026-27
