Tissues in Action
Life begins when a single cell divides itself several times to give 
rise to a large number of cells. These cells gradually form the skin 
(protection), muscles (movement), bones (support), nerves (control 
and coordination), and all other organs. This process is so intricate 
that it is considered one of nature’s greatest engineering marvels. 
Researchers have been trying to understand, replicate and modify this 
process for human welfare. To do so, it is essential to understand the 
natural biological processes that govern growth and development in 
plants and animals. What makes cells group together to form tissues? 
Why do some tissues grow throughout life while others do not?
In Chapter 2, Cell: The Building Block of Life, you have learnt that 
the cell is the basic unit of life. Many cells come together to form a 
multicellular organism. In all multicellular organisms, there is a 
hierarchy of organisation. Cells of similar type performing similar 
function group together to form a tissue, more than one type of tissues 
form organs, different organs form organ systems and organ systems 
form an organism. In unicellular organisms, such as amoeba, a single 
cell performs all functions of life. In multicellular organisms like plants 
and animals, different groups of cells perform different functions. A 
tissue is a group of cells (similar in structure) that work together to 
perform a specific function. The formation of different types of tissues 
leads to the division of labour, which increases the efficiency of the 
body and enables it to carry out complex life processes. For example, 
Think It Over
y How is the study 
of cells and tissues 
significant for 
understanding the 
life processes and 
human welfare?
y How are tissues in 
plants and animals 
different, and why?
y How is the 
division of labour 
at various levels 
of organisation 
in multicellular 
organisms 
correlated with 
their structure and 
function?
Chapter 
3
Chapter-03.indd 28 03-04-2026 20:06:57
