Tissues in Action 29
in animals, muscle tissue enables movement and nervous tissue carries 
messages to different parts of the body. In plants, conducting tissues, such as 
xylem transports water and minerals, while phloem transports food.
3.1 Why are Plant and Animal Tissues Different?
In Chapter 2, Cell: The Building Block of Life, you compared plant 
and animal cells, and studied the major differences between them. 
Most plants are fixed in one place and do not move from place to 
place like animals. They need support to stay firm and upright. 
Plant cells have a cell wall that provides rigidity and strength. In 
general, animals can move (although some, such as sponges, are 
immobile). Without a rigid cell wall, animal cells can change shape 
easily. This cellular flexibility eventually helps make their bodies 
suitable for locomotion.
Another major difference between plants and animals is their 
mode of nutrition. Animals have tissues that help them digest 
food obtained from different food sources, while plants have 
tissues that help them utilise solar energy for synthesising the 
food components through photosynthesis. Plants and animals 
have distinct tissues for transporting food and water to different 
parts of the body. The growth patterns in plants and animals also 
vary because the tissues responsible for growth differ in structure 
and function. In this chapter, we will learn how the structures of 
plant and animal tissues relate to their specific functions.
3.2 Tissues for Growth in Plants
You must have observed that a small seedling grows into a tall 
tree, roots grow deep into the soil, stems become thicker with 
time and grass grows again after being eaten by grazing animals. 
Which tissues are responsible for these changes?
Plants grow in different ways —
y increase in length (height of stem and depth of roots),
y increase in girth (thickness of stem), and
y regrowth after cutting the branches or grazing by animals.
This growth require actively dividing cells that together form a tissue 
called a meristematic tissue.
Let us explore different kinds of meristematic tissues.
3.2.1. Apical meristem — How do plants grow in length?
Let us study the growth of roots in an onion bulb.
Activity 3.1: Let us design experiments
1. Take two glass jars or couplin jars and fill them with water.
2. Now, take two onion bulbs and place one in each jar, as shown in Fig. 3.1.
3. Observe the growth of roots in both bulbs for a few days.
4. Measure the length of roots on days 1, 2 and 3.
5. On day 3, cut the root tips of the onion bulb in Jar B by about 1 cm. After 
this, observe the growth of roots in both the jars, measure their lengths 
Fig. 3.1: Experimental 
set-up to observe the 
growth of roots
(a) Jar A (b) Jar B
Meet a Scientist
B. G. L. 
Swamy was 
a renowned 
Indian 
botanist 
known 
for his 
contributions to the area 
of plant morphology and 
anatomy. His book, 
Hasuru Honnu, is a 
popular book in 
Kannada language. It is 
a blend of science, satire 
and culture. The book 
describes the botanical 
excursion in the forests 
of Western Ghats and 
is a treasure of plant 
descriptions, utilisation, 
conservation practices, 
botanical folklores and 
myths. The book won the 
Kendra Sahitya Akademi 
Award in 1978.
Chapter-03.indd 29 03-04-2026 20:06:59
