Tissues in Action 31
The increase in girth occurs due to the presence of actively dividing 
cells arranged in a ring in the stem. These cells divide and produce new 
cells inside and outside in a concentric manner, leading to an increase in 
diameter of stem. This meristematic tissue is called the lateral meristem.
3.2.3 Intercalary meristem — How do plants grow after 
being cut?
We have learnt that meristematic tissues are present at the tips of roots 
and shoots. What do you think happens to the growth of the plant if the tip 
of a young stem is cut? The stem stops growing in length but new branches 
arise from the the nodes of stem (Fig. 3.5). The intercalary meristem is 
located at the base of internode or just above the node. The node is point 
on plant stem where branches or leaves arise. The part of stem between 
the two nodes is called internode. You may also have observed that when 
the hedge around a garden is cut, after sometime more branches appear 
again, giving the hedge a bushy appearance. Grass also appear after 
sometime being mowed (Fig. 3.6) and/or grazed by animals. This happens 
because of the presence of intercalary meristem at the nodes of its stem. 
These meristematic tissues are called intercalary meristems. 
Thus, plants have three types of meristematic tissues — apical, lateral 
and intercalary. The apical meristem, located at the root and shoot tips, 
increases its length. The lateral meristem located along the circumference 
of stems increases girth. The intercalary meristem located at the base 
of certain plants, such as grasses, helps them regenerate after cutting. 
Together, these meristems account for growth in length, girth and 
branching in plants.
The cells of the meristematic tissues are small, have thin cell walls, a 
large and prominent nucleus, and dense cytoplasm with many organelles. 
Vacuoles are generally absent and the cells are tightly packed with little or 
no intercellular space. These characteristics of meristematic tissue allow 
them continuous and rapid cell division. Why do you think that the cell of 
meristematic tissues lack vacuoles? 
Due to continuous cell division, meristematic tissue adds new cells to 
the plant body. Some of the newly formed cells remain meristematic while 
others lose the ability to divide. The cells that loose the ability to divide 
undergo changes in structure and function, and become permanent 
tissues. These cells become specialised to perform specific functions, 
such as support, transport or storage. This process, by which meristematic 
tissue becomes specialised to perform specific functions, is called 
differentiation. Meristemetic tissue becomes permanent by the process 
of differentiation. 
3.2.4 Permanent tissues 
Examine the Transverse Section(s) (T.S.) of the root and/or stem, and/
or the Vertical Section (V.S.) of the leaf of any herbaceous plant under a 
microscope. The internal structure of a T.S. of a sunflower stem as seen 
under a microscope is shown in Fig. 3.7. What do you observe? Are all the 
cells similar in shape and size? How many different types of tissues can 
you identify? What differences do you notice among them? What might be 
Fig. 3.5: New branches 
arising from the node 
of a stem
New 
branch
New 
branch
Fig. 3.6: Lawn mowing
Chapter-03.indd 31 03-04-2026 20:07:06
