32 Exploration|Grade 9
might be the reason for the presence of 
different types of cells and tissues? You can 
see that different groups of cells are present 
in the T.S. of sunflower stem and each tissue 
is specialised to perform a specific function. 
These are permanent tissues. Permanent 
tissues can be simple (composed of only one 
type of cell) or complex (composed of more 
than one types of cells).
Observe the types of tissues given in Fig. 3.7 
based on pointers provided as follows:
(i)	 Protective tissue — Epidermis
What protects plants from mechanical injury, 
water loss, harmful microorganisms and 
extreme environmental conditions?
The epidermis forms the outermost 
layer of the plant body. It consists of a tightly 
packed, single layer of flat and rectangular 
cells. It protects all parts of the plants. These 
cells are covered with a waxy layer of cutin 
called cuticle. In some plants, living in very 
dry habitat, the epidemis may be covered 
by a thick layer of cuticle to reduce the 
water loss in the process of transpiration by 
stomata. The cuticle also provides protection against mechenical injury 
and invasion by prasites. In many plants, hair-like projections arise from 
epidermal cells. In roots, these projections are called root hair, which 
increase the surface area for absorption of water and minerals from 
the soil. In leaves, the epidermis contains pores called stomata, which 
apart from gaseous exchange helps in transpiration, i.e., evaporation 
of water vapours through stomata. Thus, transpiration helps in water 
transportation by creating a transpiration pull in xylem. Transpiration 
also helps in elimination of wastes from the plant body.
(ii)	 Supporting tissue — Simple permanent tissues
What keeps a plant upright? Why does a fresh twig bend but a dry twig 
break? Why are seed coats hard and how do aquatic plants float? These 
functions are carried out by supporting tissues. There are three types of 
supporting tissues or simple permanent tissues — parenchyma, collenchyma 
and sclerenchyma. Each differs in structure and performs supporting functions.
a. Parenchyma
Parenchyma consists of living cells with thin walls (Fig. 3.8a). These cells are 
loosely packed with intercellular spaces. Parenchyma mainly stores food 
but also performs photosynthesis in the green parts of the plants. In aquatic 
plants, specialised parenchyma forms air spaces, which help them float.
b.Collenchyma
Collenchyma consists of living cells with unevenly thickened corners due 
to pectin (a chemical that gives flexibility like rubber) deposition (Fig. 3.8b). 
(a) Parenchyma
Thin walls
(b) Collenchyma
Thick walls
Fig. 3.8: Various types of 
simple permanent tissues
Thick lignified walls
(c) Sclerenchyma
Epidermal hair
Epidermis
Cuticle
Phloem
Ground tissue
Lateral meristem
Xylem
Sclerenchyma
Stem
Vascular 
tissue
T.S. of the stem
Parenchyma
Collenchyma
Fig. 3.7: Internal structure of a sunflower stem
Sunflower
(Helianthus annuus)
Ground tissue
Chapter-03.indd 32 28-04-2026 14:43:20
