34 Exploration|Grade 9
2. Ground tissue system: This forms the main body of 
a plant between the dermal and conducting tissues. It 
includes parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma.
3. Vascular tissue system: This consists of conducting 
tissues — xylem and phloem.
Pause and Ponder
2. Why do you think that a thick cuticle on the outer wall of 
epidermis is advantageous for a plant living in the desert 
but disadvantageous for a plant living underwater?
3. Once water is absorbed by plant roots, it has to travel 
against gravity through xylem. How do the ‘dead’ cells of 
the xylem work together with the living cells of leaves at 
the top to keep the water moving?
4. What do you think will happen if there were no stomata 
in the epidermis of the stem or leaves?
3.3 Animal Tissues
Like plants, animal cells also group together and specialised 
in performing different functions. These groups of similar 
cells form animal tissues. Let us perform a few simple 
activities — 
y Blink your eyes quickly.
y Clench and open your fist.
y Take a deep breath.
y Touch something warm or cold.
Now think, which tissue helps you move? Which tissue 
enables you to sense heat or cold? Which tissue allows 
oxygen to enter the blood? Which tissue holds the body 
together so that the skin does not fall off?
Many such questions can be asked but the answers 
lie in the diversity of animal tissues, which are specially 
adapted to perform different functions. It is interesting to 
understand how the structure of an animal tissue suits its 
specific function.
Let us explore different kinds of animal tissues. Each 
tissue performs a specific function.
3.3.1 Epithelial tissues — Structure and 
functions 
Epithelial tissue forms the outer covering of the body 
(skin) and also lines the internal organs, such as the 
mouth, lungs, blood vessels and intestine. It is composed 
of closely packed cells with very little space between them. 
This structure prevents the entry of the germs, reduces 
Meet the Scientists
Sipra Guha Mukherjee in 
collaboration with
S. C. Maheshwari made a 
breakthrough discovery in the 
area of plant tissue culture. 
Their research led to the 
development of a complete 
plant through anther culture, 
using an artificial nutrient 
medium under controlled 
laboratory conditions. 
This pioneering work 
greatly contributed to crop 
improvement and brought 
significant progress in modern 
agriculture. 
Ready to Go Beyond
In young plants, the 
outer protective layer is a 
single-layered epidermis. 
As plants grow older, some 
cells below the epidermis of 
the stem develop the ability 
to divide, act as lateral 
meristematic cells and form 
the cork cambium. The 
division of cork cambium 
cells gives rise to cork cells. 
Cork cells are dead, compactly 
arranged, and contain a 
substance which makes them 
impermeable to water and 
gases. This forms the bark of 
the tree.
Chapter-03.indd 34 04-04-2026 17:57:24
