38 Exploration|Grade 9
movements include smooth muscles (Fig. 3.13), which are 
found in organs like the stomach and intestines. Their cells 
are spindle-shaped, have a single nucleus and lack striations. 
They help in slow, continuous movements like digestion.
The cardiac muscles (Fig. 3.13) are found only in the 
heart. Their fibres are cylindrical and branched with a 
single nucleus, and have faint striations. Cardiac muscles 
work tirelessly and rhythmically, enabling the heart to beat 
throughout life without fatigue.
3.3.4 How does the body sense, communicate and 
respond?
Have you noticed how quickly you pull your hand away 
from something hot, or how you remember the lyrics of 
a song learned long ago? These actions are controlled 
by nervous tissue, which forms the body’s control and 
coordination network. The brain acts as the control centre; 
coordinating activities, memory and responses across the 
body. Muscles, both voluntary and involuntary, cannot 
function independently. They receive instructions from 
the nervous tissue. For example, during exercise, the brain 
signals the heart to beat faster to meet the body’s increased 
oxygen demand.
The cells of nervous tissue are called neurons (Fig. 3.14) 
or nerve cells, which are specialised to receive, process and 
transmit messages. Each neuron has three main parts — the 
cell body, which contains the nucleus and controls cell 
activities; dendrites, which receive signals from other 
neurons; and an axon, a long fibre that carries messages 
from the cell and ends at axon terminals. The axon terminals 
transmit the messages to other cells.
3.4 The Musculoskeletal System
The musculoskeletal system (Fig. 3.15) is made up of 
bones, muscles, joints, cartilage, tendons and ligaments. 
This system helps us stand upright, move, maintain posture 
and protect delicate organs. The musculoskeletal system 
functions under the control of the nervous system. Muscles 
pull on bones to produce movement. They are attached to 
bones by strong, flexible bands called tendons (Fig. 3.15). 
When a muscle contracts, the tendon transmits this force 
to the bone, resulting in movement at a joint. Have you 
wondered how much of your body weight comes from 
bones? On an average, the adult human skeleton makes up 
about 12 – 15 per cent of body weight, though this can vary 
with age, gender and body composition.
Fig. 3.15: Musculoskeletal 
system in human body
Tendon
Ligament
Muscles
Cartilage
Bones
Joint
Fig. 3.13: Different types of muscles
Skeletal muscle
Cardiac muscle
Smooth muscle
Fig. 3.14: Structure of a neuron
Cell body
Dendrites
Axon 
terminals Axon
Nucleus
Chapter-03.indd 38 03-04-2026 20:07:22
