40 Exploration|Grade 9
3.5 Types of Joints
3.5.1 Ball and socket joint
The shoulder joint allows free movement of the arm 
(Table 3.5). This is because the rounded top of the upper 
arm bone fits into a shallow hollow of the shoulder bone, 
forming the ball and socket joint (Fig. 3.16). Together 
with the collarbone, the shoulder forms the shoulder 
girdle, which connects the arm to the skeleton. This 
joint allows forward, backwards, sideways and circular 
movements.
3.5.2 Hinge joint
Unlike the shoulder, the elbow bends and straightens 
in one direction only like a door hinge (Table 3.5). This 
type of joint is called a hinge joint. A similar hinge joint 
is present in the knee, where a small bone called the 
kneecap protects the joint.
3.5.3 Pivot joint
Now, try shaking your head ‘no.’ Place your hand at the 
back of your neck and feel the gentle movement. How 
does the neck move so freely? The skull is connected to 
the backbone through a pivot joint, which allows the 
head to move side to side like a doorknob turning in 
its socket.
3.5.4 Fixed joints
The skull is a hard case of flat bones joined together to 
protect the brain, eyes and ears. The bones of the skull 
are connected by fixed joints, which means the bones 
of the skull cannot move. This keeps the brain safe even 
when the body moves.
Fig. 3.16: Types of joints
Fixed joint
Hinge joints
Ball and socket 
joints
Pivot joint
Pause and Ponder
5. Look at the picture given below (Fig. 3.17). Carefully observe the various poses of classical
and folk dances of India. Can you identify which joints are involved? Also, what type of 
movement each joint allows?
Fig. 3.17: Poses of classical and folk dances of India
Ready to Go Beyond
Stem cells in the bone marrow 
are special cells that can divide 
and make new cells. In a bone 
marrow transplant, stem cells 
from a healthy person are given to 
patients who have blood cancers 
like Leukemia or disorders, such 
as Thalassemia.
Chapter-03.indd 40 03-04-2026 20:07:25
