Tissues in Action 43
Bridging Science and Society
In nature, plant pathologists have observed a disease in plants called crown 
gall disease (Fig. 3.20). In this disease, tumour-like swellings develop on the 
stems due to rapid and uncontrolled cell division. The disease is caused by 
a bacterium called Agrobacterium tumefaciens.
Instead of only trying to cure this disease, scientists studied how a 
bacterium transfers its genetic material into plant cells. This knowledge 
was later used in plant tissue culture and genetic engineering. Today, 
Agrobacterium is used as a tool to introduce useful genes into plants 
for the production of valuable phytochemicals, improved crops and 
disease-resistant varieties.
Fig. 3.20: Crown 
gall disease
y Tissues are groups of similar cells that work together to perform 
specific functions.
y Different tissues coordinate with one another to perform life 
processes in plants and animals.
y Plant tissues are broadly classified into meristematic and 
permanent tissues, depending on their ability to divide.
y Functionally, plant tissues can be categorised as protecting tissue, 
supporting tissue and conducting tissue. 
y Permanent tissues may be simple (made-up of one type of cell) or 
complex (made-up of more than one type of cell).
y Simple permanent tissues include parenchyma, collenchyma and 
schlerenchyma.
y Complex permanent tissues include xylem and phloem that 
transport water and food respectively to all parts of the plant.
y Animal tissues are mainly of four types; epithelial, connective, 
muscular and nervous tissues.
y Epithelial tissue forms the outer covering of the body or protective 
lining to internal organs to provide protection and other functions. 
y Connective tissue connects and supports various organs and 
tissues of the body.
y Muscular tissue produces voluntary and involuntary movements 
for locomotion, and other movements in the body.
y Nervous tissue consists of neurons to receive and transmit 
impulses, and helps regulate body activities.
y Skeletal system protects organs and provides support.
y In our body, movement occurs by the coordination of muscles and 
bones (musculoskeletal system), under the control of the nervous 
system.
At a Glance
Chapter-03.indd 43 03-04-2026 20:07:38
