46 Exploration|Grade 9
9. Aamrapali observed that a young mango sapling’s stem bends flexibly 
during monsoon winds and does not break. Which tissue is responsible 
for this flexibility? Predict and provide your explanation of the impact 
if the existing tissue was replaced by sclerenchyma.
10. Sohan designed an experiment for the 
regeneration of sugarcane, where he 
used cuttings to grow sugarcane. He used 
two types of cuttings, type ‘A’ and type 
‘B’ (Fig. 3.23). After a few weeks, type ‘B’ 
cuttings sprouted and developed into 
sugarcane plants, whereas the type ‘A’ 
cuttings did not sprout. 
(i) Why were the type ‘B’ cuttings able to 
grow as sugarcane but type ‘A’ could 
not? 
(ii) What difference was present in type ‘B’ 
compared to type ‘A’?
(iii) What observation or measurement 
was made to determine whether this 
change had an effect?
(iv) What parameters should be kept the same for both types of cuttings 
to ensure a fair comparison?
11. During the discussion in class, Rohan gives a statement that, “A tissue 
is a group of similar cells performing similar functions”. But Rajiv 
counter argues that, “this is true in case of simple tissues but little 
different in case of complex tissues”. Provide your explanation in view 
of the discussion in class.
12. Coconut husk fibres are used for mats which are tough and fibrous. 
Which tissue has structural features suitable for providing this 
strength? Explain why living parenchyma couldn’t serve the same 
purpose.
13. Vibha claims to her friend Neha that, “Meristematic cells are located 
only at the root and shoot apices”. What do you think about this 
statement? What question can Neha ask Vibha to help her understand 
further if the statement is incorrect?
14. A plant cell and an animal cell are of the same size.
(i) Which cell will have a larger vacuole? Give reasons.
(ii) What assumptions are you making to answer the question above?
15. A textbook states, “Each plant tissue performs only one specific 
function”. What questions would you ask to critically examine the 
correctness of this statement? What examples of tissues would you 
take to find out the answers to these questions?
(A) (B)
Fig. 3.23
Chapter-03.indd 46 03-04-2026 20:07:47
