Tissues in Action 47
The Journey Beyond
y Visit a doctor and find out what happens in ligament rupture, cartilage 
rupture and fracture of bones. How can we reduce the risk by changing 
our lifestyle and nutritional balance? 
y Perform the following activity.
(i) Sit with your feet flat on the floor. 
(ii) Place your fingers on the back of your ankle 
just above the heel (Fig. 3.24). 
(iii) Point your toes down and up, and you will feel 
the tendon moving.
Tendons are designed to withstand huge pulling 
forces. Try exploring other tendons in your body 
around the different joints.
y Reflect on any of the physical practices you are 
familiar with, such as yoga, kabaddi, etc. How would it support bone 
and muscle health?
y Reflect on any gardening methods you know, such as pruning, grafting, 
irrigation or crop rotation. How does each practice support the healthy 
functioning of plant tissues like meristems, conducting tissues or 
supporting tissues?
y Turn a nature walk into a research project. 
(i) Observe different leaves and study their adaptations for various 
environments, such as desert, very moist or aquatic habitats.
(ii) Consult an elder community resource persons about their 
knowledge on different plant leaves, such as leaves that remain 
fresh for a long time, repel water or deter insects. Find out their 
traditional uses, such as making plates, preparing cooling wraps 
or functioning as insect repellents.
y Study various dance forms of different tribal communities across the 
country. Each student learn and experience at least five steps. Observe 
the joint movements involved in performing these steps and then 
develop a dance or drama on the concept of joint movements. Perform 
this at the school’s annual function so that students from different 
grades can learn from it.
Fig. 3.25
Fig. 3.24
Will it be possible to obtain a complete animal from an animal cell like plants? 
If yes, what would be the advantages and challenges of this development?
The Quest Continues…
Chapter-03.indd 47 04-04-2026 15:22:39
