254Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
THINK ABOUT IT
Vegetables are sold cheaper late at night at the weekly market 
compared to during the day. Why do you think this is so? 
Garment stores offer heavy discounts on woollen clothing at 
the end of the winter season. Why does this happen?
Markets Around Us
Markets are present everywhere and in various forms. 
Physical and online markets
A physical market is where buyers can meet the seller physically, 
and purchase goods or services in exchange for money. This is 
the most common type of market. It includes weekly markets and 
haats where vendors sell vegetables, other essential items, and 
handicraft items lined up on a cart. Local markets with shops 
and buzzing with vendors selling street food, knick-knacks, and 
so on are also physical markets. There are also multi-storey 
buildings, i.e., malls in cities and towns spanning large areas 
with stores inside. 
Today buyers and sellers need not necessarily meet in person 
to engage in a transaction. They can transact from a convenient 
location even thousands of kilometres away from each other. 
They can use shopping applications (apps) or 
websites on a phone or a computer. These apps 
or websites are created by businesses that make 
available a wide variety of goods and services. We 
will read about how this works in a section below. 
One can buy goods ranging from books, clothes, 
furniture, and grocery items to electronic items 
like TVs, mobile phones, and laptops, and get 
them delivered to their doorstep. Manufacturers
can also buy components online to be used as 
inputs for production of goods. Apart from goods, one 
can also avail of services like online classes without having 
to step outside the home. Payments for such services can also 
be made online.
Manufacturer: 
A person or 
company that 
makes goods 
for sale
Inputs for 
production:
Materials or 
resources that 
are used in the 
production 
of goods and 
services.
Fig. 12.8 
Chapter 12.indd 254 4/8/2025 11:21:32 AM
Reprint 2026-27
