102 MATHEMATICS
In fact, the problems of the above types are solved by applying the following
principle known as the fundamental principle of counting, or, simply, the multiplication
principle, which states that
“If an event can occur in m different ways, following which another event
can occur in n different ways, then the total number of occurrence of the events
in the given order is m×n.”
The above principle can be generalised for any finite number of events. For
example, for 3 events, the principle is as follows:
‘If an event can occur in m different ways, following which another event can
occur in n different ways, following which a third event can occur in p different ways,
then the total number of occurrence to ‘the events in the given order is m × n × p.”
In the first problem, the required number of ways of wearing a pant and a shirt
was the number of different ways of the occurence of the following events in succession:
(i) the event of choosing a pant
(ii) the event of choosing a shirt.
In the second problem, the required number of ways was the number of different
ways of the occurence of the following events in succession:
(i) the event of choosing a school bag
(ii) the event of choosing a tiffin box
(iii) the event of choosing a water bottle.
Here, in both the cases, the events in each problem could occur in various possible
orders. But, we have to choose any one of the possible orders and count the number of
different ways of the occurence of the events in this chosen order.
Example 1 Find the number of 4 letter words, with or without meaning, which can be
formed out of the letters of the word ROSE, where the repetition of the letters is not
allowed.
Solution There are as many words as there are ways of filling in 4 vacant places
by the 4 letters, keeping in mind that the repetition is not allowed. The
first place can be filled in 4 different ways by anyone of the 4 letters R,O,S,E. Following
which, the second place can be filled in by anyone of the remaining 3 letters in 3
different ways, following which the third place can be filled in 2 different ways; following
which, the fourth place can be filled in 1 way. Thus, the number of ways in which the
4 places can be filled, by the multiplication principle, is 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 24. Hence, the
required number of words is 24.
Reprint 2026-27
