PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS 103
ANote If the repetition of the letters was allowed, how many words can be formed?
One can easily understand that each of the 4 vacant places can be filled in succession
in 4 different ways. Hence, the required number of words = 4 × 4 × 4 × 4 = 256.
Example 2 Given 4 flags of different colours, how many different signals can be
generated, if a signal requires the use of 2 flags one below the other?
Solution There will be as many signals as there are ways of filling in 2 vacant places
 in succession by the 4 flags of different colours. The upper vacant place can
be filled in 4 different ways by anyone of the 4 flags; following which, the lower vacant
place can be filled in 3 different ways by anyone of the remaining 3 different flags.
Hence, by the multiplication principle, the required number of signals = 4 × 3 = 12.
Example 3 How many 2 digit even numbers can be formed from the digits
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 if the digits can be repeated?
Solution There will be as many ways as there are ways of filling 2 vacant places
 in succession by the five given digits. Here, in this case, we start filling in unit’s
place, because the options for this place are 2 and 4 only and this can be done in 2
ways; following which the ten’s place can be filled by any of the 5 digits in 5 different
ways as the digits can be repeated. Therefore, by the multiplication principle, the required
number of two digits even numbers is 2 × 5, i.e., 10.
Example 4 Find the number of different signals that can be generated by arranging at
least 2 flags in order (one below the other) on a vertical staff, if five different flags are
available.
Solution A signal can consist of either 2 flags, 3 flags, 4 flags or 5 flags. Now, let us
count the possible number of signals consisting of 2 flags, 3 flags, 4 flags and 5 flags
separately and then add the respective numbers.
There will be as many 2 flag signals as there are ways of filling in 2 vacant places
 in succession by the 5 flags available. By Multiplication rule, the number of
ways is 5 × 4 = 20.
Similarly, there will be as many 3 flag signals as there are ways of filling in 3
vacant places in succession by the 5 flags.
Reprint 2026-27
