124 MATHEMATICS
are of first kind, p2
 objects are of the second kind, ..., pk
 objects are of the k
th
kind and rest, if any, are all different is 
1 2
!
! ! !k
n
p p ... p .
ÆThe number of combinations of n different things taken r at a time, denoted by
nCr
 , is given by nCr
 = 
!
! !
n
r ( n r )
=
−
, 0 ≤ r ≤ n.
Historical Note
The concepts of permutations and combinations can be traced back to the advent
of Jainism in India and perhaps even earlier. The credit, however, goes to the
Jains who treated its subject matter as a self-contained topic in mathematics,
under the name Vikalpa.
Among the Jains, Mahavira, (around 850) is perhaps the world’s first
mathematician credited with providing the general formulae for permutations and
combinations.
In the 6th century B.C., Sushruta, in his medicinal work, Sushruta Samhita,
asserts that 63 combinations can be made out of 6 different tastes, taken one at a
time, two at a time, etc. Pingala, a Sanskrit scholar around third century B.C.,
gives the method of determining the number of combinations of a given number
of letters, taken one at a time, two at a time, etc. in his work Chhanda Sutra.
Bhaskaracharya (born 1114) treated the subject matter of permutations and
combinations under the name Anka Pasha in his famous work Lilavati. In addition
to the general formulae for nCr
 and nPr 
already provided by Mahavira,
Bhaskaracharya gives several important theorems and results concerning the
subject.
Outside India, the subject matter of permutations and combinations had its
humble beginnings in China in the famous book I–King (Book of changes). It is
difficult to give the approximate time of this work, since in 213 B.C., the emperor
had ordered all books and manuscripts in the country to be burnt which fortunately
was not completely carried out. Greeks and later Latin writers also did some
scattered work on the theory of permutations and combinations.
Some Arabic and Hebrew writers used the concepts of permutations and
combinations in studying astronomy. Rabbi ben Ezra, for instance, determined
the number of combinations of known planets taken two at a time, three at a time
and so on. This was around 1140. It appears that Rabbi ben Ezra did not know
Reprint 2026-27
