A Story of Numbers
49
Sensing her curiosity, her father started telling her how the idea of 
number and number representation evolved over the course of time, 
across geographies, to finally reach its modern efficient form. 
Get ready to travel back in time with them!
Humans had the need to count even as early as the Stone 
Age. They were counting to determine the quantity of food 
they had, the number of animals in their livestock, details 
regarding trades of goods, the number of offerings given in 
rituals, etc. They also wanted to keep track of the passing 
days, e.g., to know and predict when important events such 
as the new moon, full moon, or onset of a season would occur. 
However, when they said or wrote down such numbers, they 
didn’t make use of the numbers that we use today.
The structure of the modern oral and written numbers that we use 
today had its origin thousands of years ago in India. Ancient Indian texts, 
such as the Yajurveda Samhita, mentioned names of numbers based on 
powers of 10, almost as we say them orally today. For example, they listed 
names for the numbers one (eka), ten (dasha), hundred (shata), thousand 
(sahasra), ten thousand (āyuta), etc., all the way up to 1012 and beyond.
The way we write our numbers today — using the digits 0 through 9 — 
also originated and were developed in India, around 2000 years ago. The 
first known instance of numbers being 
written using ten digits, including the digit 0 
(which was then notated as a dot), occurs in 
the Bakhshali manuscript (c. 3rd century 
CE). Aryabhata (c. 499 CE) was the first 
mathematician to fully explain, and do 
elaborate scientific computations with the 
Indian system of 10 symbols.
The Indian number system was transmitted to the Arab world 
by around 800 CE. It was popularised in the Arab world by the great 
Persian mathematician Al-Khwārizmī (after whom the word ‘algorithm’ 
is named) through his book On the Calculation with Hindu Numerals
(c.825) and by the noted philosopher Al-Kindi through his work On the 
Use of the Hindu Numerals (c.830).
From the Arab world, the Hindu numerals were transmitted to Europe 
and to parts of Africa by around 1100 CE. Though Al-Khwārizmī’s work 
on calculation with Hindu numerals was translated into Latin, it was the 
Italian mathematician Fibonacci who around the year 1200 really made 
the case to Europe to adopt the Indian numerals. However, the Roman 
numerals were so ingrained in European thinking and writing at the 
time that the Indian numerals did not gain widespread use for several 
more centuries. But eventually, during the European Renaissance and 
by the 17th century, not adopting them became impossible or it would 
impede scientific progress. 
Zero in the Bakhshali manuscript
Chapter 3.indd 49 10-07-2025 17:44:18
Reprint 2026-27
