A Story of Numbers
53
An obvious limitation of using only the letters of the English alphabet 
in this form is that it cannot be used to count collections having more 
than 26 objects.
How many numbers can you represent in this way using the sounds 
of the letters of your language?
Method 3: We could use a sequence of written symbols as follows.
Do you see a way of extending this method to represent bigger numbers 
as well? How?
From the discussion above, we see that for counting and finding the 
size of a collection, we need a standard sequence of objects, or names, 
or written symbols, that has a fixed order. Let us call this standard 
sequence a number system. A collection of objects can be counted by 
making a one-to-one mapping between them and the standard sequence, 
following the sequence order.
Since there is no end to numbers, the challenge is to come up with 
an unending standard sequence/number system that is easy to count 
with. Using sticks gives an unending standard sequence/number system. 
However, it is not convenient to count larger collections, as we will 
need as many sticks as the number of objects being counted. Using the 
sounds of the letters of a language, as in Method 2, is convenient for 
the counting process but is not an unending standard sequence/number 
system. The standard sequence/number system given in Method 3 was 
actually the system used in Europe before it got replaced by the Hindu 
number system. It is called the Roman number system. It was widely 
used in Europe for centuries, and was convenient for many purposes, 
but had the similar drawback that one cannot write arbitrarily large 
numbers without introducing more and more symbols. We will learn 
more about this system of writing numbers later on. 
Math 
Talk
Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Representation 
using symbols
I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X
Number 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Representation 
using symbols
XI XII XIII XIV XV XVI XVII XVIII XIX XX
Table 1
Chapter 3.indd 53 10-07-2025 17:44:18
Reprint 2026-27
