A Story of Numbers
73
This is exactly what the Mesopotamians did! In their numeral, the 
rightmost set of symbols showed the number of 1s, the set of symbols to 
its left showed the number of 60s, the next showed the number of 3600s 
and so on. Whenever there was no occurrence of a power of 60, a blank 
space was given in that position.
It does not seem that the Mesopotamians arrived at this idea in the 
same way we did. Some scholars suggest that the similarity of symbols 
given to the landmark numbers 1 and 60 in their earlier number system, 
and an accidental usage of them, might have made them stumble upon 
this idea.
Figure it Out
1. Represent the following numbers in the Mesopotamian system —
(i) 63  (ii) 132  (iii) 200  (iv) 60  (v) 3605
Thus, we can see how the Mesopotamian system removes the need for 
generating an unending sequence of symbols for the landmark numbers 
by making use of the positions where the symbols are written. Such a 
number system (having a base) that makes use of the position of each 
symbol in determining the landmark number that it is associated with is 
called a positional number system or a place value system.
This idea of place value marks the highest point in the history of 
evolution of number systems, and gives a very elegant solution to the 
problem of representing the unending sequence of numbers using only 
a finite number of different symbols!
The Mesopotamian system however cannot be considered a fully 
developed place value system. It has certain defects that lead to confusion 
while reading a number.
Look at the representation of 60. What will be the representation for 
3,600?
While writing the numerals, the spacing between symbols was not 
given the way we are giving it here. It was also difficult to maintain a 
consistent spacing for blanks across different manuscripts written by 
different people. These created ambiguities. For example, consider the 
representations of the following numbers —
Chapter 3.indd 73 10-07-2025 17:44:26
Reprint 2026-27
