A Story of Numbers
79
reading or writing numerals. It is for this reason that the Hindu number 
system is now used throughout the world. 
The use of 0 as a digit, and indeed as a number, was a breakthrough 
that truly changed the world of mathematics and science. In Indian 
mathematics, indeed, zero was not just used as a placeholder in the place 
value system, but was also given the status of a number in its own right, 
on par with other numbers. The arithmetic properties of the number 0 
(e.g., that 0 plus any number is the same number, and that 0 times any 
number is zero) were explicitly used by Aryabhata in his Āryabhaṭīya in 
499 CE to compute with and do elaborate scientific computations using 
Hindu numerals. The use of 0 as a number like any other number, on 
which one can perform the basic arithmetic operations, was codified 
by Brahmagupta in his work Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta in 628 CE, as we 
learned in an earlier grade. 
By introducing 0 as a number, along with the negative numbers, 
Brahmagupta created what in modern terms is called a ring, i.e., a set of 
numbers that is closed under addition, subtraction, and multiplication 
(i.e., any two numbers in the set can be added, subtracted, or multiplied 
to get another number in that set). These new ideas laid the foundations 
for modern mathematics, and particularly for the areas of algebra and 
analysis. 
Hopefully, this gives you a sense of all the ideas that went into writing 
and computing with numbers in the way that we do today. The discovery 
of 0 and the resulting Indian number system is truly one of the greatest, 
most creative, and most influential inventions of all time—appearing 
constantly in our daily lives and forming the basis of much of modern 
science, technology, computing, accounting, surveying, and more. The 
next time you are writing numbers, think about the incredible history 
behind them and all the deep ideas that went into their discovery!
Evolution of Ideas in Number
Representation
1. Count in groups of a single number.
ukasar-ukasar-urapon
2. Group using landmark numbers.
I V X L C M
3. Choosing powers of a number as landmark 
numbers—the idea of a base.
 1 101
 102
 103
 104 …
4. Using positions to denote the landmark numbers—the 
idea of place value system.
1 7 2 9 
5. The idea of 0 as a positional digit and as a number.
Chapter 3.indd 79 10-07-2025 17:44:28
Reprint 2026-27
