129Tapestry of the Past 6 – The Age of Reorganisation
One of the caves prominently displays the Hāthīgumphā
inscription, written in Brahmi script, which records King 
Khāravela’s accomplishments year after year, including his 
victorious military campaigns and his benevolent works for the 
welfare of his people. Khāravela also proudly declares that he 
created a ‘council of ascetics and sages’ from a hundred regions 
and is ‘accomplished in extraordinary virtues, respector of every 
sect and repairer of every temple’. Once again, a ruler takes 
pride in extending his protection to all schools of thought. This 
is a fundamental part of what we may call the ‘Indian ethos’. 
 THINK ABOUT IT
Notice the regularity of the rock-cut chambers sculpted 
nearly two millennia ago. How did artisans achieve such 
precision with just a chisel and a hammer? Picture yourself 
as a sculptor in that era, shaping stone into art with your own 
hands. What tools would you use? 
Kingdoms and Life in the South
In India’s southern region, this period, between the 2nd or 3rd 
century BCE and the 3rd century CE, saw the rise to prominence 
of three powerful kingdoms — the Cheras, the Cholas and the 
Pānḍyas — which often competed with each other for control 
over the South, while also contributing to the region’s growth 
in trade and culture. Let’s remember how Aśhoka’s empire 
stopped at those south Indian kingdoms (which he mentions in 
his edicts), which suggests that they remained independent even 
at the height of Mauryan power. And although Khāravela claims 
that he defeated an alliance of south Indian kings that threatened 
his own territory, the location of that battle is unknown and he 
does not seem to have invaded the southern region.
THINK ABOUT IT 
In the map given on next page, you may notice different 
symbols alongside the names of the kingdoms. What do 
these symbols represent? Think about how they highlight the 
unique identities of the kingdoms. 
Chapter 6.indd 129 08-04-2025 11:38:35
Reprint 2026-27
