Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6
186
wear the dress that you used to wear four years ago? No, 
because you have become larger in size. This is due to growth 
in your body. Plants and other living beings also grow. Can 
we consider growth as a characteristic of living beings? 
Living beings need food (nutrition) for their growth 
and development. List five living beings that require food 
to grow.
Now, think of a process without which we cannot live. 
Count the number of breaths you take per minute after 
a normal walk, after a run, and after a few dance steps. 
Record the data and observe. Do you notice any difference 
in the number of breaths after each situation? Do you notice 
the process of breathing in other animals like dogs, cats, 
cows and buffaloes? Notice the movement of their abdomen 
while they are taking rest. 
In the process of breathing, when we inhale, the air 
moves from outside to inside our body. When we breathe 
out, the air moves from inside our body to outside. 
Breathing is part of a process called respiration. Do 
plants also respire? There are tiny pores called stomata 
on the surface of leaves. These pores help plants in taking 
air in and out. Interact with senior class students in your 
school and request if they can demonstrate stomata using 
a microscope in your class. All living beings respire.
Have you noticed white patches forming on shirts around 
the armpits during summers? These 
patches are formed due to sweat. The 
sweat consists of water and salts removed 
by the body as waste products. Removal 
of waste products from the body is called 
excretion. Urine is also formed as a 
product of excretion in animals. Do you 
know that plants also excrete? You may 
notice plants excrete excess water and 
minerals in the form of small droplets on 
leaves. For example, grasses and roses. All 
living beings excrete.
Let us look at another characteristic. 
What is your reaction if you unexpectedly 
Water droplets on grass step on a sharp object, such as a thorn, 
Chapter 10.indd 186 10/4/2024 3:10:11 PM
Reprint 2026-27
