Activity 10.5: Let us analyse
Let us solve an interesting puzzle.
How will you decide which stage (larva or pupa) comes 
immediately after the egg stage? 
Suppose you are given a container with water from a 
puddle containing larvae and pupae. Design an activity to 
find out the correct sequence of these stages.
You can take help of the following activity designed by 
Avadhi to create your own activity— 
Step 1: I have a water container with mosquito larvae and 
pupae. 
Step 2: I will separate 4–5 larvae and pupae into two 
separate containers with the same water. 
Step 3: I will observe them every day until I see them 
changing to the next stage. 
Step 4: If the larvae change into pupae, it would mean that 
the larval stage comes before the pupal stage or 
vice-versa.
Step 5: I will keep watching both the containers to see in 
which one a mosquito appears first. 
These observations will help us to learn the correct 
sequence of growth.
Now, suppose you are given a container filled with water 
from a puddle which contains larvae and pupae. Without 
separating them from the container, how would you design 
an activity to decide which stage, out of the two, gives way 
to the next?
My design ...
Let us learn more about these stages in the life cycle of a 
mosquito.
Mosquitoes pass through four stages in their life cycle— 
egg, larva, pupa and adult (Fig. 10.6). 
The adult mosquito that emerges from the pupa rests 
briefly on the surface of water and then flies away. The adult 
mosquito may survive for 10 to 15 days. 
We have seen that a mosquito begins its life as an egg 
(stage I), the egg develops into a larva (stage II), the larva 
grows into pupa (stage III), and the pupa transforms into an 
adult mosquito (stage IV). The adult female mosquito lays 
eggs directly on or near water, and the cycle continues.
Significant changes occur in the appearance, body shape 
and structure during the various stages in the life cycle of 
a mosquito. The shape of the egg is quite different from the 
larva; the larva appears very different from the pupa. The 
pupa appears very distinct from the adult mosquito. Is it 
easy to imagine that a mosquito emerges from a pupa?
The silk moth also passes through four life stages—egg, larva, 
pupa and adult. Eggs hatch into larvae, which then grow in 
size. Larvae secrete thread-like material which they 
wrap around themselves, before changing to pupae. 
These are the fibres that are used to make silk fabric. 
In India, the Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
(KVIC) has set up several centres for silk production. Do you 
know?
10.5.2 Life cycle of a frog
Activity 10.6: Let us analyse
Avadhi and Aayush are dressed up in full sleeves shirts and 
full pants today. It has been raining intermittently for a week. 
They are going out with their classmates for an activity. 
After a brief walk led by their science teacher, they reach a 
shallow pond. It is surrounded by trees and tall grasses. The 
teacher cautions them to watch everything from a distance 
Living Creatures: Exploring their 
Characteristics
199
Chapter 10.indd 199 10/4/2024 3:12:00 PM
Reprint 2026-27
