Nature’s Treasures
213
and snow, or underground water is difficult to access. A very 
small fraction of the freshwater present in ponds, rivers, 
lakes and wells is easily accessible. Water is precious, that is 
why Ajji guides them to use it with care.
Do you feel that water is being used efficiently in our 
daily activities? Have you observed water being wasted in 
your daily activities? Let us find out activities where water 
is wasted and how this wastage can be reduced.
Activity 11.3: Let us find out
Fill the Column II and Column III in Table 11.1.
sources by throwing trash (waste materials) in them. Waste 
from homes and industries pollute our water sources when 
it is dumped into them. Identify other human activities that 
lead to water pollution. Discuss with your friends in the class 
what you can do to reduce water pollution. Polluted water is 
not fit for consumption by living beings.
As freshwater sources are limited, there is a shortage of 
water in many parts of India. At some places, people have to 
walk long distances to fetch drinking water. Everyone does 
not have the same kind of access to water. It is important 
for us to conserve water and use it judiciously. We must 
also prevent it from being polluted so that water remains fit 
for consumption by all living beings. In what ways can you 
conserve water? 
Water harvesting is one of the 
methods for conserving water. In many 
buildings, rainwater is collected 
and stored in large quantities for 
later use. This is called rainwater 
harvesting (Fig. 11.4a). Do you know 
that rainwater is also harvested in 
many homes, residential societies or 
schools? It is an age-old practice in 
India. 
For example, stepwells (Fig. 11.4b), 
commonly known as Bawadi in 
Rajasthan and Vav in Gujarat are 
built for water harvesting as a 
response to the scarcity of water in 
these regions. These stepwells have 
a unique system of water harvesting. 
They store not only rainwater but 
also water seeping from nearby 
lakes, ponds and rivers. The walls of 
the trenches (long deep holes dug in 
the ground) are lined with blocks of 
stones that allow seepage of water. 
Find traditional water harvesting 
practices in your locality. Discuss 
with your teachers and parents to 
learn more about it. 
Fig. 11.4 (b): Bawadi (Toorji ka Jhalra, 
Jodhpur in Rajasthan) 
Fig. 11.4 (a): Rainwater harvesting
Chapter 11.indd 213 10/4/2024 3:04:36 PM
Reprint 2026-27
