Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6
224
get replenished through natural processes over a period 
of time. If you remember, Ajji told Bhoomi and Surya that 
they could collect only those nellikai that had fallen on the 
ground. This makes sure that there would be enough fruits 
for other animals and birds. The seeds from the droppings of 
animals and birds would enable new trees to grow, though 
it would take some years before we get fruits from these 
new trees. Thus, resources which get renewed, replenished 
or restored within a reasonable period of time are called 
renewable resources. Air, water and forest are some of the 
examples of renewable natural resources. Nature renews 
them. We should use our natural resources judiciously. 
On the other hand, fossil fuels take millions of years to 
form. They are found in limited quantities and once used, 
they get exhausted. They are not produced or replenished 
within a reasonable period of time. These resources are called 
non-renewable resources. Examples of non-renewable 
natural resources are minerals, soil, rocks, coal, petroleum 
and natural gas.
11.8 Resources we use
It is time for Bhoomi and Surya to go back home after a 
wonderful holiday at their Ajji’s home. Their Amma (mother) 
comes to pick them up. Bhoomi and Surya show her the 
vegetable plants that have started to grow in the garden and 
the dried chillies given by Ajji to take home.
They notice changes in the colour of the skyline and the 
smell of the air once they reach the city. There are very few 
trees. The air does not smell as good as the air at Ajji’s place. 
They can smell smoke from the vehicles. The air is polluted. 
Amma says, “Yes. When we use fossil fuels in our vehicles, 
smoke is generated. Now, there are vehicles which cause 
less pollution. For example, there are electric vehicles that 
do not release any smoke. So, people are making an effort to 
create alternatives.” 
Can you list some alternatives for reducing air pollution?
Chapter 11.indd 224 10/4/2024 3:05:43 PM
Reprint 2026-27
