30
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
sleep, spend time with family and friends, and have a positive 
attitude. What should we do and what should we avoid to keep 
ourselves healthy?
Activity 3.2: Let us list
z List some good habits that your parents, teachers, or elders 
often encourage you to follow. How many of these are already 
a part of your daily routine? Which ones would you like to 
start following? Add to the list below:
{ Keep yourself clean by maintaining personal hygiene.
{ Eat a healthy and balanced diet.
{ Exercise regularly.
{ Make time to relax or meditate every day.
z Now, think about habits that are not good for your health. 
Add more to the list below:
{ Spending too much time on mobile phones or other digital 
screens.
{ Eating fast food and other junk food every day.
{ Sleeping very late or not getting enough sleep.
{ Skipping meals, especially breakfast.
Taking care of our body and mind is important. Healthy habits 
support a healthy body as well as a healthy mind. 
Discuss your findings with your friends and teacher. From 
the activity you participated in and the discussions, you may 
have realised that our health depends on many factors. These 
factors include our lifestyle (how we live) and our environment 
(our surroundings).
3.2.1 Maintain a healthy lifestyle
z Eat a balanced diet with plenty of fruits, vegetables, and 
whole grains.
z Avoid processed, fatty, or sugary food and drinks.
z Stay physically active by playing outdoors, walking, running, 
cycling, or exercising.
z Limit screen time and spend more time in nature. 
z Get enough sleep to help your body and mind rest and recover.
z Practice yoga or simple breathing exercises like pranayama 
regularly.
z Say ‘NO’ to harmful substances like tobacco, alcohol, and 
addictive drugs (Fig. 3.2).
Eat a balanced diet
Stay physically active
Say ‘No’ to smoking or 
alcohol
Manage stress
Get enough sleep
Fig. 3.2: How to be healthy
Chapter 3.indd 30 24-Sep-25 1:48:04 PM
Reprint 2026-27
