Chapter 3 — Health: The Ultimate Treasure 37
Be a scientist
Kamal Ranadive (1917–2001) was a pioneering 
biomedical researcher. She studied how hormones 
and certain viruses are linked to cancer, helping 
improve its treatment and prevention. Her work 
also showed how tobacco, diet, and pollution can 
raise the risk of cancer, highlighting the importance 
of a healthy lifestyle.
3.5 How to Prevent and Control Diseases?
You might have heard the phrase ‘Prevention is better than cure.’ 
It is important to protect ourselves from both communicable and 
non-communicable diseases.
Activity 3.6: Let us read
Odisha — community-led sanitation campaign
In Bhadrak district, Odisha, a community sanitation campaign 
helped more people build and use toilets. This reduced open 
defecation significantly, and improved child health, with fewer 
cases of diarrhoea and infections.
What do you infer from this case study? Simple steps like good 
sanitation can greatly reduce the spread of communicable diseases. 
Find about such community campaigns held in your location. Share 
in your class and discuss with your peers about the impact of such 
initiatives.
Ability of the body to fight diseases 
You would have noticed that some people get sick more frequently 
than others, although living in a similar environment. Do you 
know why? The natural ability of our body to fight diseases is 
known as immunity. Our body has a special system called the 
immune system that helps fight against diseases. 
You might have taken some drops or injections in your 
childhood to protect yourself from certain diseases, such as 
polio, measles, tetanus, and hepatitis. These are vaccines that 
help prevent serious infections caused by viruses and bacteria. 
A vaccine helps our body fight certain diseases by training 
the immune system to recognise and attack harmful germs, 
providing what is known as acquired immunity—protection 
developed after exposure to a pathogen or a vaccine. Vaccines can 
be made in different ways—from weakened or dead pathogens 
(like viruses or bacteria), or from inactive or harmless parts of 
the pathogen. Some newer vaccines instruct our own body cells 
Chapter 3.indd 37 16-09-2025 04:48:13
Reprint 2026-27
