Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
140
FASCINATING FACTS
फलकुसमसु पदं ुिचता रोपणतो भवित के वलान् न यत: ।
“Trees do not produce fruits and flowers merely because they are planted.”
This line is from an ancient Indian text named Vrikshayurveda. It records 
useful observations about plant growth, soil, and agricultural practices to 
help improve crop health, growth and production. The knowledge in the 
text seems to be based on practical experiences and patterns seen over 
time. These ideas were then systematically documented to guide farming 
practices. For instance, there are references to diff erent methods of organic 
manure preparation, such as mixing water, barley, and various seeds, like 
green, black, and horse grams.
. It records 
useful observations about plant growth, soil, and agricultural practices to 
help improve crop health, growth and production. The knowledge in the 
text seems to be based on practical experiences and patterns seen over 
time. These ideas were then systematically documented to guide farming 
practices. For instance, there are references to diff erent methods of organic 
manure preparation, such as mixing water, barley, and various seeds, like 
10.2 How Do Plants Get Food for their 
Growth?
We know that animals get their food from plants, either directly by 
eating plants or indirectly by eating animals that in turn eat plants 
for their nutrition and growth. But how do plants obtain the food 
they need to grow? Unlike animals, plants do not eat food. 
10.2.1 Leaves: the ̒ food factories̓of plants
Plants store food in the form of starch, a type of carbohydrate. 
This starch is produced in the leaves of a plant which, by design, 
are generally broad and fl at. These are mostly green because of 
the presence of a green pigment called chlorophyll, that helps in 
capturing sunlight effi ciently.
Let us fi nd out the role chlorophyll plays in the preparation of 
food in the form of starch in plants. 
Activity 10.2: Let us check (demonstration activity)
The teacher may demonstrate this 
activity.
 Keep a leaf in boiling water for 
fi ve minutes to soften it.
 Dip this leaf in a test tube 
containing alcohol.
 Place the test tube in a beaker 
containing boiling water. 
Wait until the leaf becomes 
colourless (Fig. 10.2a). 
(a) Boiling set-up (b) Iodine test
Fig. 10.2: Starch test in a leaf
Water
Alcohol
Leaf
Sprit lamp
Wire
gauze
Test 
tube
Iodine 
solution
Chapter 10.indd 140 4/3/2025 4:55:48 PM
Reprint 2026-27
