Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
148
Activity 10.7: Let us experiment
 Take two tumblers and label them A and B. 
 Fill one-third of each tumbler with water.
 Add a few drops of red ink to tumbler B.
 Obliquely cut the stems of both plants at their 
base while keeping them inside the water and 
immediately place one plant in each tumbler, 
as shown in Fig. 10.7a and Fig. 10.7b.
 Observe these plants the next day.
What do you notice? Compare the plant 
stems placed in the tumblers. Do you observe 
red colour in the stem, leaves, and fl owers of the 
plant from Tumbler B? Fig. 10.7c and Fig. 10.7d 
show the plants after one day. Compare the plant 
in Fig. 10.7c with that in Fig. 10.7d. A red colour 
is visible in the stem, leaves, and fl owers of the 
plant in Fig. 10.7d. How did diff erent parts of the 
plant acquire this red colour? 
Cut the stem from the upper part of the plant 
that is not immersed in the red-coloured water. 
Observe the cut stem using a magnifying glass. Do 
you spot the red colour in the stem (Fig. 10.7e)? 
How does the red colour ink move upwards? This 
is due to the thin tube-like structure called the 
xylem present in the stem, branches, and leaves 
of plants. Just like red ink, minerals dissolved in 
water also move up the stem through the xylem. 
Now, we know that water and minerals are 
transported to the leaves and other parts of 
plants through the xylem (Fig. 10.8). The water 
transported through the xylem is used to perform 
various functions. How does food get transported 
to other parts of a plant? 
10.3.2 Transport of food
We know that leaves are the primary site for 
photosynthesis. The food prepared by plants in the 
leaves is transported to all parts of the plant. This 
food is transported through another set of thin 
tube-like structures called the phloem (Fig. 10.8). 
The transported food may also be stored in some 
other parts of a plant, such as seeds and roots.
A B
(a) With water (b) With coloured water
plant twigs placed in water with different 
treatments 
A B
plant twigs after one day
(c) With water (d) With coloured water
(e) Enlarged view of cut end of the twig
Fig. 10.7: Experiment to check for 
water transportation in plants
Fig. 10.8: Transport of water 
and minerals in a plant
Water transport 
through xylem
Food transport 
through phloem
Cut
Phloem
Xylem
Chapter 10.indd 148 4/3/2025 4:55:55 PM
Reprint 2026-27
