Life Processes in Plants
149
10.4 Do Plants Respire? 
In the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity, chapter ‘Living 
Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics’, you learnt that all 
living beings respire. Do plants also respire like we do?
Activity 10.8: Let us fi nd out
(demonstration activity)
 Soak some moong bean seeds in water overnight.
 Put a layer of cotton in a conical fl ask (Fig. 10.9) and moisten 
the cotton with water to keep it wet. 
 Place the soaked seeds over the wet cotton in the conical fl ask. 
 Cover the mouth of the conical fl ask with 
a cork having two holes. 
 Fit two tubes A and B through the two 
holes on the cork, as shown in Fig. 10.9. 
 Leave it undisturbed for 24 hours in 
the dark.
 Take two test tubes and fi ll them with 
lime water.
 Cover the mouth of one test tube with a 
cork having one hole in it.
 Dip one glass tube in the test tube 
through a hole in the cork.
 Connect the fl ask and test tube with a rubber pipe as shown 
in Fig. 10.9.
Compare both the test tubes for any change in colour. Does 
the lime water turn milky in both the test tubes? Why does the 
lime water turn milky in the test tube connected to the fl ask? 
Lime water turns milky due to the presence of more carbon 
dioxide in the fl ask. But where does this carbon dioxide come 
from? As we know, carbon dioxide is naturally present in very 
small quantities in the air. In the fl ask, additional carbon dioxide 
is produced by the seeds as they respire. 
During respiration, glucose is broken down in the presence of 
oxygen, releasing carbon dioxide, water, and energy. The word 
equation for the proccess of respiration, is as follows — 
Glucose + Oxygen Carbon dioxide + Water + Energy
The energy produced during respiration is used by plants 
for their growth and development. All parts of a plant, green or 
non-green, carry out respiration.
Thus, plants have diff erent mechanisms for synthesising, 
transporting, and utilising food to get energy. 
Fig. 10.9: Set-up to test respiration in plants
Tube A Lime water
Tube B
Germinating 
seeds 
Chapter 10.indd 149 4/3/2025 4:55:55 PM
Reprint 2026-27
