100
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
These specks of chalk powder can be broken further into 
smaller particles by further grinding. Let us imagine that this 
process of grinding continues. Eventually, we would reach a stage 
where the chalk particles cannot be broken down any further. 
The tiny units obtained at this stage 
are the basic building blocks that the 
chalk was made up of. 
This means that one whole piece of 
chalk was made up of a large number 
of smaller units. These units are called 
constituent particles of chalk. A constituent particle is the basic 
unit that makes up a larger piece of a substance or material. Just 
like chalk, the grains of sand and clay are not the smallest units 
of bigger rocks. These are also made up of a large number of 
their constituent particles.
Let us explore further!
Recall the dissolution of sugar into water to form a solution. 
What happens to sugar when it is dissolved in water?
Activity 7.2: Let us perform
z Fill a glass tumbler with 
drinking water. 
z Put two teaspoons of sugar 
into it.
z Do not stir the water. Taste a 
small spoonful of water from 
the top layer.
Does the water taste sweet? 
z Now, stir the water until the sugar dissolves completely 
(Fig. 7.2). 
z Again taste a spoonful of water from the top layer.
What difference in taste do you notice? Does it taste sweet? 
Since the top layer of water tastes sweet after dissolving 
sugar, it must be present in the solution. Do you observe any 
sugar particles in the solution? 
Sugar particles can no longer be observed but their 
presence can be sensed by taste. When sugar dissolves in 
water, it breaks up into its constituent particles which cannot 
be broken down further. Each tiny grain of sugar is made up 
of millions and millions of such constituent particles.
Are the units of chalk 
obtained in this manner 
considered the smallest 
units of chalk?
Fig. 7.2: Dissolving 
sugar in water
Safety first
Perform the activity under the 
supervision of a teacher or an adult. 
Never eat or drink anything unless 
asked to.
Chapter 7.indd 100 10-Sep-25 4:59:03 PM
Reprint 2026-27
