Chapter 7 — Particulate Nature of Matter 105
You can move your finger through water without breaking 
or cutting it permanently, which cannot be done in the case of 
solids. When you try this, you are temporarily displacing water. 
As soon as you remove your finger, the position of the water is 
restored. We can say that in liquids, the interparticle attractions 
are slightly weaker than in solids, but still strong enough to keep 
the particles close together. 
Recall Curiosity, Grade 6 chapter ‘Temperature and Its 
Measurement’, where you observed the temperature of boiling 
water (liquid). When a liquid is heated, a stage comes when 
it starts boiling. The temperature at which a liquid boils and 
turns into vapour at atmospheric pressure is called its boiling 
point. The movement of particles becomes so vigorous that they 
move apart from each other, resulting 
in a decrease in the interparticle forces 
of attraction. Eventually, the constituent 
particles can escape from the liquid state. 
The liquid is converted into vapour or the 
gaseous state.
At the boiling point, the formation of vapour is very fast and 
occurs not only at the surface but also within the liquid. This 
process is observed as bubble formation in the liquid. However, 
vapour formation occurs at all temperatures, even below the 
boiling point, though slowly and only at the surface. This slower 
process is known as evaporation— about which you have learnt 
in earlier grades.
7.2.3 Gaseous state
Do gases also have 
a fixed volume?
Activity 7.5: Let us investigate
z Take two transparent gas jars or glass tumblers 
and mark them A and B. 
z Create some smoke by burning an incense stick. 
z Hold the Gas Jar A upside down over the smoke (Fig. 7.7a). 
z The gas jar should trap the smoke inside.
z Turn it over and cover it with a glass plate (Fig. 7.7b).
z Hold another Gas Jar B upside down and gently place it over 
the glass plate covering the Gas Jar A.
I have seen that spilled 
water disappears after 
some time, and it happens 
at any temperature!
Safety first
Be careful while burning 
an incense stick.
Chapter 7.indd 105 6/28/2025 2:53:06 PM
Reprint 2026-27
