Changes Around Us: Physical and Chemical
63
We observe that the candle that was not covered (Fig. 5.6a) 
continues to burn, whereas the candle that was covered with a 
glass tumbler (Fig. 5.6b) stops burning after some time. Why does 
this happen?
Since the candle covered by the glass tumbler does not have 
a continuous supply of air, the fl ame gets extinguished soon. 
The component of air that supports combustion is oxygen. This 
can be confi rmed by the presence of carbon dioxide in the glass 
tumbler inverted on the candle. How can you test the presence 
of carbon dioxide gas? 
You can test the carbon dioxide gas by adding a small amount 
of lime water in the petri dish. You will notice that it turns milky. 
This carbon dioxide was formed by the carbon from the wax and 
the oxygen from the air. In other words, oxygen is required for 
combustion.
SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
If a person’s clothes catch fi re, what is the best way to extinguish 
the fi re?
Wrap a blanket or cloth around the person. This cuts off the 
supply of air, and the fi re gets extinguished. 
Caution — Synthetic blanket or cloth should never be used to put 
out a fi re, as these can melt and stick to the skin.
FASCINATING FACTS
Nature’s wonders: You might have 
seen some insects emitting light in 
a garden or a fi eld in late evenings. 
These insects are called fi refl ies, and 
their light is produced by a chemical 
change. This type of light production 
(without heat) in living organisms is 
called bioluminescence.
Fireflies 
 You might have 
seen some insects emitting light in 
a garden or a fi eld in late evenings. 
These insects are called fi refl ies, and 
their light is produced by a chemical 
change. This type of light production 
(without heat) in living organisms is 
Fireflies 
Is the Presence of Air Enough for Combustion?
We learnt above that combustible substances and oxygen 
are necessary for combustion. We also know that paper is a 
combustible substance, but we can keep it in the air for any 
length of time without it catching fi re. What else is needed to 
start combustion?
Let us learn about this.
Chapter 5.indd 63 4/3/2025 4:52:50 PM
Reprint 2026-27
