162 MATHEMATICS
Fig 6.10
(ii) One may note that the function f in Example 27 is not differentiable at
x = 0.
Example 16 Find the maximum and the minimum values, if any, of the function
given by
f (x) = x, x ∈ (0, 1).
Solution The given function is an increasing (strictly) function in the given interval
(0, 1). From the graph (Fig 6.10) of the function f , it
seems that, it should have the minimum value at a
point closest to 0 on its right and the maximum value
at a point closest to 1 on its left. Are such points
available? Of course, not. It is not possible to locate
such points. Infact, if a point x0
 is closest to 0, then
we find 0
0
2
x
< x for all 0
x ∈(0,1). Also, if x1
 is closest
to 1, then 1
1
1
2
x
x
+
> for all 1
x ∈(0,1) .
Therefore, the given function has neither the
maximum value nor the minimum value in the interval (0,1).
Remark The reader may observe that in Example 16, if we include the points 0 and 1
in the domain of f , i.e., if we extend the domain of f to [0,1], then the function f has
minimum value 0 at x = 0 and maximum value 1 at x = 1. Infact, we have the following
results (The proof of these results are beyond the scope of the present text)
Every monotonic function assumes its maximum/minimum value at the end
points of the domain of definition of the function.
A more general result is
Every continuous function on a closed interval has a maximum and a minimum
value.
ANote By a monotonic function f in an interval I, we mean that f is either
increasing in I or decreasing in I.
Maximum and minimum values of a function defined on a closed interval will be
discussed later in this section.
Let us now examine the graph of a function as shown in Fig 6.11. Observe that at
points A, B, C and D on the graph, the function changes its nature from decreasing to
increasing or vice-versa. These points may be called turning points of the given
function. Further, observe that at turning points, the graph has either a little hill or a little
valley. Roughly speaking, the function has minimum value in some neighbourhood
(interval) of each of the points A and C which are at the bottom of their respective
Reprint 2026-27
