164 MATHEMATICS
Fig 6.13
Similarly, if c is a point of local minima of f , then the graph of f around c will be as
shown in Fig 6.14(b). Here f is decreasing (i.e., f ′(x) < 0) in the interval (c – h, c) and
increasing (i.e., f ′(x) > 0) in the interval (c, c + h). This again suggest that f ′(c) must
be zero.
The above discussion lead us to the following theorem (without proof).
Theorem 2 Let f be a function defined on an open interval I. Suppose c ∈ I be any
point. If f has a local maxima or a local minima at x = c, then either f ′(c) = 0 or f is not
differentiable at c.
Remark The converse of above theorem need not
be true, that is, a point at which the derivative vanishes
need not be a point of local maxima or local minima.
For example, if f (x) = x
3
, then f ′(x) = 3x
2
 and so
f ′(0) = 0. But 0 is neither a point of local maxima nor
a point of local minima (Fig 6.13).
ANote A point c in the domain of a function f at
which either f ′(c) = 0 or f is not differentiable is
called a critical point off. Note that if f is continuous
at c and f ′(c) = 0, then there exists an h > 0 such
that f is differentiable in the interval
(c – h, c + h).
We shall now give a working rule for finding points of local maxima or points of
local minima using only the first order derivatives.
Theorem 3 (First Derivative Test) Let f be a function defined on an open interval I.
Let f be continuous at a critical point c in I. Then
(i) If f ′(x) changes sign from positive to negative as x increases through c, i.e., if
f ′(x) > 0 at every point sufficiently close to and to the left of c, and f ′(x) < 0 at
every point sufficiently close to and to the right of c, then c is a point of local
maxima.
(ii) If f ′(x) changes sign from negative to positive as x increases through c, i.e., if
f ′(x) < 0 at every point sufficiently close to and to the left of c, and f ′(x) > 0 at
every point sufficiently close to and to the right of c, then c is a point of local
minima.
(iii) If f ′(x) does not change sign as x increases through c, then c is neither a point of
local maxima nor a point of local minima. Infact, such a point is called point of
inflection (Fig 6.13).
Reprint 2026-27
