Foreword
The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 envisions an education system 
that is firmly rooted in India’s cultural and intellectual wisdom, values, and 
ethical traditions. The rich intellectual heritage simultaneously enables 
learners to engage meaningfully with the complexities and possibilities of 
a rapidly changing world. The National Curriculum Framework for School 
Education (NCF-SE) 2023 provides concrete expression to this vision by 
laying out a coherent curricular pathway across various stages of schooling 
that nurtures critical thinking, creativity and sensitivity, along with the 
values and dispositions that are needed for responsible citizenship in an 
interconnected global society.
Learners have progressed through the foundational, preparatory and 
middle stages, where their inherent potential has been nurtured holistically. 
Now, they enter the secondary stage with enhanced capacity for reflection, 
reasoning, enquiry, and self-expression. Spanning across Grades 9 to 12, also 
known as the adolescent stage, it marks a crucial period in the intellectual 
and personal growth of the students. It prepares them to engage with abstract 
ideas, complex social realities, ethical dilemmas and the expanding universe 
of knowledge, while deepening their understanding of the self and the world 
around them.
The NCF-SE 2023 recommends that the curriculum for Grades 9–10 
equips students with the skills that are needed to grow as they advance 
in their lives. Students can use these skills for reasoning, argumentation, 
and effective communication. It endeavours to enhance their analytical 
and descriptive capabilities to prepare them for the challenges and 
opportunities that await them. A diverse curriculum, covering ten subjects; 
three languages—including at least two languages native to India, 
Science, Mathematics, Social Science, Art Education, Physical Education 
and Well-being, Individuals in Society or Environmental Education, and 
Vocational Education promotes their holistic development.
As per the NCF-SE 2023, science education at this stage aims to develop 
scientific temper, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills. It emphasises 
connecting scientific concepts to everyday life enabling students to 
understand and apply knowledge meaningfully. The framework promotes 
inquiry-based learning, environmental awareness, and values, such as 
curiosity, objectivity, and respect for evidence making science learning 
engaging, relevant, and learner-centred.
Exploration, the textbook of science for Grade 9, aligns with the 
NEP 2020 and the NCF-SE 2023 by promoting experiential and inquiry-based 
learning. It encourages students to ask questions, make predictions, analyse 
information, and draw logical conclusions. The textbook presents science as 
0_Prelims.indd 3 03-04-2026 20:11:50
