You may have enjoyed learning science through your textbooks Curiosity
during the middle stage. You may have realised that science is not just about 
answers; it begins with questions. This indicates that you have begun to 
develop an interest in learning and exploring science. As you continue this 
journey, this ongoing cycle of questioning and discovery becomes a natural 
part of how you grow and understand the world. By the end of Grade 8, you 
would have successfully developed all the competencies outlined in the 
NCF-SE 2023 for the middle stage.
Building on this strong foundation, the Grade 9 science textbook has been 
developed in alignment with the NEP 2020 and the NCF-SE 2023 to support a 
deep understanding and sustained interest in science. Exploration, the title 
of the science textbook for Grade 9, means investigating the unknown by 
observing, posing questions, and experimenting to understand and discover 
the world around us. This textbook is designed to help you learn topics 
related to the world of matter, its interactions and properties at the atomic 
level; the physical world, and the scientific principles and laws that govern 
it; the structure and function of the living world at the cellular level, and the 
interconnectedness between organisms and their environment.
The main aim of the science textbook, Exploration, is to engage you in 
understanding the processes of science and discovering new information. 
The emphasis is on integrating topics from biology, chemistry, physics, earth 
science, and other curricular areas, such as environmental education, value 
education, and inclusive education. The goal is to help you learn through 
real experiences and not by simply memorising facts. After going through 
this book, we hope you will become a responsible and sensitive member 
of society.
Exploration contains 13 chapters. Each chapter includes engaging 
activities, thought-provoking questions, and clear illustrations to support 
your learning. The design, layout, and cover page visually communicate 
curiosity, exploration, and the nature of science. It provides a visual 
overview of the scientific concepts that may be covered in the textbook. 
The first chapter, ‘Exploration: Entering the World of Secondary Science’, 
provides guidance on examining scientific concepts more closely and 
carefully. It makes you aware of scientific language, scientific ideas, 
and their appropriate use for clear, unambiguous communication. 
It also helps to understand the world around us more systematically 
through experimentation. This chapter encourages you to appreciate 
how science connects naturally with mathematics, technology, arts, and 
social sciences. It motivates you to ask focused questions, design and try 
About this Book
0_Prelims.indd 5 03-04-2026 20:11:51
