vii
Let us take a look at the approach used in this textbook. It is activity-based. 
These activities are designed to reflect how science works, offering both 
intellectual and hands-on experiences. They promote teamwork and are 
inclusive. You are expected to explore concepts by performing activities and 
seeking guidance from teachers, especially during experiments involving 
heating devices, corrosive chemicals, microscopes, and similar equipments. 
In some activities, Safety first or precautions are provided to ensure you 
work safely, particularly when using flammable, corrosive, hot, sharp, or 
breakable materials. These precautions help prevent accidents, ensuring 
that everyone can enjoy the activities while learning safely. Teachers are 
expected to pay special attention while supporting children with special 
needs and to encourage peer interaction. Notes are added at various places 
to provide additional information, explorations, or clarifications without 
interrupting the main text. They may help you better understand the content.
Each chapter includes a few Think It Over questions that encourage 
you to reflect deeply and explore new ideas. Some of these questions 
are open-ended and thought-provoking, often framed as why, what, 
or how questions, to promote critical thinking and curiosity. You 
may not find immediate answers to all of them, but do not worry; 
you will be able to explore these questions as you progress through 
the chapter. These questions help deepen your curiosity and provide 
insight into the process of science. In fact, several questions may 
arise in your mind and we hope that you may find answers as you 
go through the chapters.
Think It Over
At various places in the text, you may find Grade of the textbook,
Name of the textbook, Chapter number as an icon, which helps 
you remember what you already know and link it to new concepts. 
Next Level Up will make you aware that there is still more to 
know about the topic, which you will learn in higher grades. 
Several concepts bridge science with other subjects and these 
interconnections can be explored by accessing the textbooks of different 
subjects through the provided website link: https://ncert.nic.in/textbook.php
Questions are provided after each section or sub-section for 
self-assessment. These questions help you assess your understanding 
and reflect how much you have learnt. Many of them encourage 
critical thinking, reflection on your own ideas, and critical analysis 
of concepts. In addition, solved numerical examples are included 
wherever necessary to clarify concepts.
Pause and Ponder
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 8
Next 
Level
 Up
0_Prelims.indd 7 03-04-2026 20:11:58
