x
The Journey Beyond
A key feature of the book is The Journey Beyond, which 
includes activities and projects designed to encourage 
positive interaction with classmates, experts, teachers, 
parents, and the community. These activities motivate 
you to gather information from diverse sources and draw 
your own conclusions. This approach makes science 
more interesting, challenging, meaningful, and closely 
connected to real life. Some activities and projects may 
require prior preparation.
Special care has been taken to simplify the language without losing the rigour 
of science, so that the concepts can be understood easily. The textbook is one 
way to learn, but you should also explore and observe your surroundings. 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) can further enhance 
learning when used appropriately. Quick Response (QR) codes and hyperlinks 
in the textbook provide access to interactive resources allowing learners to 
explore at their own pace.
Friends! Science is full of wonders and there is always more to explore. 
That is why Exploration motivates you to keep searching, investigating, and 
discovering new ideas and knowledge.
Textbook Development Team
These steps help you stay safe.
Protect your information online!
Use strong passwords that include letters, numbers, and symbols.
Never share your passwords with anyone, not even friends.
Avoid clicking on unknown links and pop-up advertisements.
Do not download applications or files from unknown or untrusted 
websites.
Never share personal details, such as your phone number or address.
Always log out after using email or other online accounts.
Inform your teacher or a trusted elder in your family if you come across 
anything online that makes you feel unsafe. 
How to stay safe while exploring and gathering information 
from the internet?
The last page (epilogue), Ready for New Horizons? revisits key 
ideas and looks ahead to the exciting science of Grade 10.
0_Prelims.indd 10 03-04-2026 20:12:11
