187Governance and Democracy 9 – From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government
What is Democracy?
As we studied in Grade 6, ‘democracy’ is best understood as ‘rule 
of the people.’ This means that the source of power and authority 
in a democracy are the people of the country. Let’s understand 
this with the example of a school.
A school example
A school is full of activities and things that must be done. Many 
day-to-day tasks need to be managed, and things need to be 
organised. For example, there are timetables to be made and 
followed, sports activities to be organised, food to be served 
during lunch time (also called the mid-day-meal), utensils to be 
cleaned, speakers to be decided for the morning assembly, and 
activities to be arranged for ‘No Bag Days’. The list is very long 
in terms of all that needs to be done in the school.
With so many things to be done, the Head Teacher realised that a 
Student Committee should be appointed so that students can be 
part of making the relevant rules to get all this done, then help in 
implementation of the rules, and ensure that the rules are being 
followed. The question before the Head Teacher was — who will 
be part of the committee?
The Head Teacher discussed this in the assembly. She proposed 
that it would be good if some students can take responsibility 
for these tasks. A student committee should be formed. Hearing 
this, the students got excited and started arguing.
Naghma: Students in Grade 12 are 
the most senior; we will take care of 
everything.
Shobha: But you will finish school in a 
few months. The students in Grade 11 
should take care of everything.
Gurpreet: If the students of only one 
grade will take care of everything, 
then how will they know about the 
problems that other grades face? Fig. 9.3
 THINK ABOUT IT
The school 
example helps 
us to understand 
the concept of 
representation 
and how it 
works. However, 
the students’ 
committee is 
different from 
Parliamentary 
and Legislative 
committees, 
as class 
representatives 
in a school are 
quite different 
from Members of 
Parliament (MPs) 
and Members of 
the Legislative 
Assembly (MLAs). 
What are these 
differences? 
Discuss with your 
teacher in the 
classroom and 
make a list.
Chapter 9.indd 187 02-06-2025 09:59:48
Reprint 2026-27
