190Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
What Makes Governments Different?
The government of any country evolves over time. Since countries 
have their own history, culture, and aspirations, it is natural that 
governments of different countries are different. Let’s look at 
some aspects that can make one form of government different 
from another. These differences will become clearer when we 
look at various types of government later in the chapter.
Key differences between governments
Who gets to 
decide that 
‘this is the 
government’? 
How is the 
government 
formed?
What are 
the different 
parts of the 
government 
and what do 
they do?
1. Who gets to decide that ‘this is the government’? 
This is the most basic difference across many types 
of government. Who or what says that ‘this is the 
government of our country’? That is, who or what gives 
the government its authority and power? For example, 
in a democracy like India, it is the people of the country 
who decide and are the source of authority, while in a 
theocracy, the source of authority is religious beliefs and 
the head of a religious institution.
2. How is the government formed? In a democracy, a 
government is formed usually through some kind of 
election. While in kingdoms which have kings or queens, 
the kind that you have read about in other chapters, 
usually someone from within the family continues to 
rule and decide how the government will be set up. 
There are other ways of forming a government, and even 
in democracies there can be different kinds of elections.
3. What are the different parts of the government and 
what do they do? Any government has many parts 
and systems, and these vary across different types 
of government. For example, the three functions 
of government referred to earlier—legislative, 
executive, and judiciary—can be performed by totally 
independent bodies or by the same body. The system to 
decide how the government will work can be written 
down in a book of fundamental rules of the country, 
called the ‘constitution’, which is what happens in most 
Chapter 9.indd 190 08-04-2025 11:43:47
Reprint 2026-27
