Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 9
The human eye can only see objects that are above a certain 
size. For a long time, many tiny things around us remained 
unknown. Long ago, people discovered that a curved piece of 
glass could make small things look bigger. The piece of glass 
was shaped like a lentil seed—thick in the middle and thin at 
the edge—hence they called it a lens. Over time, lenses were 
improved to become more powerful. Each new tool, from simple 
magnifying glasses to microscopes, helped humans see what 
their eyes could not. The invention of the microscope opened 
a fascinating hidden world filled with tiny living creatures. We 
will explore some of these life forms in this chapter.
You have already learnt about the amazing variety of living 
beings. Just look around—there are so many beautiful plants 
and animals! They are of all shapes, sizes, and colours. Some 
living beings are tiny, while others are really big. They differ not 
only in their structure but also in many other features. All these 
living beings, whether plants or animals, are called organisms. 
Have you ever noticed the smallest organism around you that is 
visible to the naked eye? Think about it—how small a thing can 
your eyes actually see? 
You might have seen some people using reading glasses. How 
does it help them see better? Or what happens when we use a 
magnifying glass to observe something?
Activity 2.1: Let us observe
z Take a round-bottom flask made up of glass as shown in 
Fig. 2.1. Fill it with water.
z Close the mouth of the flask with a cork.
z Now, place the flask on an open book and look at 
the letters through it.
Do you notice something interesting? The letters 
appear larger when seen through the flask! This 
happens because the flask filled with water acts like a 
magnifying glass. Now, use a real magnifying glass to 
look at small organisms, like an ant. Were you able to 
see the details of its body more clearly?
For a long time, people were curious to explore the 
tiny organisms around them, but they could not see them 
with their naked eyes. So, how did we finally discover 
this invisible world? Do you know which scientific 
discovery helped us see the tiny world for the first time? Fig. 2.1: Round-bottom flask
Chapter 2.indd 9 6/30/2025 4:19:35 PM
Reprint 2026-27
