12
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Activity 2.3: Let us investigate
z Rinse your mouth with clean water.
z Use the blunt end of a clean toothpick, and gently scrape the 
inside of your cheek.
z Place the scraped material in a drop of water on a clean glass 
slide and spread it evenly.
z Add a drop of methylene blue (a blue-coloured stain) over 
the material on slide. Adding stain improves the visibility of 
the material under the microscope by increasing contrast.
z After one minute, add a drop of glycerin over the material on 
the slide to prevent the cells from drying.
z Now, carefully place a clean coverslip on the material, and 
remove the excess glycerin from the edges of the coverslip 
using blotting paper.
z Observe the slide under a microscope and draw what you 
see in your notebook.
What did you observe? You will observe a polygon￾shaped structure as shown in Fig. 2.4. These are cheek 
cells, which form the inner lining of your mouth.
What similarities and differences did you observe 
between the cells of onion peel in Activity 2.2 and 
human cheek cells in Activity 2.3? 
You have observed that cells have three main parts. 
The outer layer is called the cell membrane. The 
round structure in the middle is the nucleus, which is 
also covered by a thin membrane. The space between 
the cell membrane and nucleus is filled with cytoplasm. These 
three—cell membrane, cytoplasm, and nucleus — are the basic 
parts of a cell. Some cells, like onion peel cells, have an extra 
outer layer called the cell wall. What is the importance of these 
structures in a cell? What functions do they perform? Are these 
functions important for the maintenance of life?
The cell membrane encloses the cytoplasm and nucleus. The 
cell membrane separates one cell from another. It is porous and 
allows the entry of materials essential for life processes and the 
exit of waste material.
Cytoplasm contains other components of the cell and 
compounds, such as carbohydrates, proteins, fats, and mineral 
salts. Most of the life processes take place within the cytoplasm.
Fig. 2.4: Mount of human cheek cells
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Cell membrane
Chapter 2.indd 12 10-Sep-25 10:08:25 AM
Reprint 2026-27
