Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 13
The nucleus regulates all activities that occur within the cell. 
It also regulates growth.
The cell wall in the plant cell provides rigidity and strength 
to plants. This is why all cells are arranged compactly with each 
other and look firm in structure.
A step further
Cells in all parts of a plant have tiny rod-shaped structures called 
plastids. Some plastids, like chloroplasts, contain chlorophyll, which 
makes them green and helps in photosynthesis. In non-green parts, 
they help in the storage of substances. Plant cells also have a large, 
empty-looking space called a vacuole. This helps the plant cell store 
important substances, get rid of waste, and maintain the shape of 
the cell. This gives strength and support to the plant. In animal cells, 
vacuoles are usually not present, if present, they are usually small. 
These small vacuoles store certain substances dissolved in water 
(Fig. 2.5). So, a cell is not just a simple bag of liquid—it is a complex 
structure made up of many different parts, each with its own special 
function to allow the cell, and in turn the entire organism to work.
(a) (b)
Nucleus
Cell wall
Cell membrane
Cytoplasm
Vacuole
Chloroplast
Mitochondria
Fig. 2.5: A schematic drawing of (a) An animal cell and (b) A plant cell. 
(The colours are to show different parts of the cell)
We have now understood the basic structure of cell. And we 
now also understand that plant and animal cells differ in shape and 
structure.
Do different animal cells also vary in their shape and structure?
2.1.1 Variation in shape and structure of cells
The muscle cell and the nerve cell of a human are shown in Fig. 2.6a 
and (b). What are the similarities and differences you see in them?
A muscle cell (Fig. 2.6a) is shaped like a spindle, while a nerve 
cell (Fig. 2.6b) is very long and has branches. Similarly, some cells 
are round in shape, while others are long and thin. The number 
of cells also varies in different organisms. Why do cells look so 
different from each other? Does the shape and structure of a cell 
relate to its function? 
(a) Muscle cell
(b) Nerve cell
Fig. 2.6: Different types 
of cells in humans
Chapter 2.indd 13 10-Sep-25 10:08:25 AM
Reprint 2026-27
