14
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
The unique shape, size, and structure of cells help them 
carry out their specific functions. But how do these cells help in 
performing various functions in the body? Let us find out.
You observed in Activity 2.3 that inner cheek cells are thin 
and flat. They form a protective lining on the inner surface of the 
cheek. Nerve cells also known as neurons carry messages in our 
body. The elongated shape and branched structure help them 
reach different parts of the body and pass on messages quickly. 
Similarly, plant cells also show variation. In plants, too, cells may 
be rectangular, elongated, oval, or even tube-like. Some plant 
cells form long tubes that help carry water throughout the plant.
You have already studied the digestive system in Grade 7. Different 
parts of the digestive system are made up of different types of cells. 
A group of muscle cells are present in the food pipe. These cells 
contract and relax in a wave-like manner, pushing the food down 
to the stomach. This movement is possible because muscle cells are 
thin, flexible, and spindle-shaped. The stomach also has different 
types of cells for performing different functions. Muscle cells in the 
stomach wall help churn the food. Other cells in the inner lining of 
the stomach produce digestive juices and acid that help break down 
the food. All these cells work together to make digestion possible.
2.2 What Are the Levels of Organisation in 
the Body of a Living Organism?
The body of a living organism is organised in a complex way. Cell 
(Fig. 2.7a), is the basic unit of life, just like a brick is the basic unit of wall 
(Fig. 2.3d). A group of similar cells forms a type of tissue (Fig. 2.7b). 
Different tissues are organised to form an organ (Fig. 2.7c). Several 
organs work together to form an organ system that performs a 
major function of the body (Fig. 2.7d). All the organ systems together 
make up a complete organism (Fig. 2.7e) — like a plant or an animal.
So, the levels of organisations are:
Cell Tissue Organ Organ system Organism
These levels of organisation help us understand how simple 
building blocks like cells come together to form a complex 
living being.
The life of complex living organisms begins with a single cell— 
‘egg’. The egg of any organism has an amazing ability to divide 
repeatedly to form a complete living being made up of many cells. 
Such living beings are called multicellular organisms. Animals, 
including humans, and plants are all examples of multicellular 
organisms.
(d) Organ 
system
(a) Cell
(b) Tissue
(e) Organism
Fig. 2.7: Levels of 
organisation of life
 (c) Organ 
Chapter 2.indd 14 1/28/2026 4:34:13 PM
Reprint 2026-27
