Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 15
Ever heard of ...
The yolk (the yellow part of an egg) of an 
ostrich egg is a single cell—the largest 
known cell in the living 
world—measuring about 130 
mm to 170 mm in diameter. The 
egg contains extra non-cellular 
material: a shell for protection and a white liquid that 
nourishes the cell during its continued development.
2.3 What Are Microorganisms?
Some living organisms are made up of just one or very few cells. 
They are so small that they can not be seen with the naked eye. 
These are called microorganisms. Some microorganisms, like 
bacteria and Amoeba, are made of just one cell (unicellular). Others, 
like some fungi and algae, have many cells (multicellular). They 
are found all around us—in water, soil, air, and even inside our 
body! But what do their cells look like? Are they like the plant and 
animal cells we just learnt about, or are they different? To observe 
the cells of a microorganism, again, we need to use a microscope 
which magnifies their size and makes them visible to us. Scientists 
have also created a low-cost and foldable paper microscope. Such 
foldable paper microscope may not provide the same level of 
details like high-powered laboratory microscopes. However, these 
make microscopic world accessible to many people.
Let us now take a closer look at the fascinating world of microbes.
Activity 2.4: Let us observe pond water/
stagnant water
z Take a container and collect pond or stagnant water in it 
with the help of your teacher or elder(s).
z Use a dropper and place a drop of pond or stagnant water on 
a microscope slide. Put a coverslip and observe it under the 
microscope.
z Observe the tiny organisms found in the pond or stagnant 
water.
Activity 2.5: Let us observe soil suspension
z Take a beaker and collect some moist soil in it from the 
nearby field or garden. Do not touch the soil with your bare 
hands—use a spoon or gloves.
Chapter 2.indd 15 18-Sep-25 3:17:20 PM
Reprint 2026-27
