18
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
2.4 How Are We Connected to Microbes?
Can we find microorganisms in other places, too? 
Let us have a discussion:
Have you ever seen a lemon, tomato, orange, or any 
other food item rot after being left outside for some 
time? If yes, you may have noticed a powdery or 
cotton-like growth on them (Fig. 2.9). This happens 
because they have been infected by microbes. But 
where did these microbes come from? How did they 
come in contact with the food?
This happens because microorganisms can be found 
everywhere, be it in water, soil, air, or even in some food items. 
You can use a 
microscope to explore 
surfaces of leaves, stems, 
roots, or any other part to 
see them. Like plants and 
animals, microorganisms 
also show great diversity. 
Some of them can even be 
found in extreme climatic 
conditions, such as hot 
water springs and snow 
cold zones as well as at moderate temperatures. You already know 
some of these organisms live inside our bodies, especially in our 
gut! You have studied in the chapter ‘Life Processes in Animals’ in 
Curiosity, Grade 7 that our intestine has many bacteria that help in 
digestion. Like plants and animals, microorganisms vary in shape, 
size, and structure. In Tables 2.1 and 2.2, you would have observed 
microorganisms of different shapes—spherical, rod-shape, or 
irregular.
How does the diversity of microorganisms play a role in our 
daily life? How do they help clean the environment?
2.4.1 Key players in cleaning the environment
Let us attempt to understand this by doing an activity.
Activity 2.7: Let us do
z Take an empty container and fill it halfway with garden soil.
z Add some fruit and vegetable peels to the container. 
Thereafter, put a layer of soil on it and leave it aside.
This is because you add many spices 
with salt or sugar to it which act as 
preservatives. High concentration 
of salt or sugar do not allow these 
organisms to grow on them.
But why do microorganisms
not infect the pickles and 
murabbas?
Fig. 2.9: Fruit with microorganism 
growing on it
Chapter 2.indd 18 18-Sep-25 3:17:31 PM
Reprint 2026-27
