Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 19
z After 2–3 weeks, observe the changes 
that have taken place.
z Do you observe any difference in the 
contents of the container?
You may find that peels of fruits and 
vegetables have turned into a dark-coloured 
material. This is manure, which is rich in 
nutrients and helps increase the fertility of 
the soil. But how did the peels of fruits and 
vegetables turn into manure?
In Activity 2.6, you saw that soil contains 
various kinds of microorganisms. Some of 
these microorganisms, like fungi and bacteria, 
act on the plant waste and slowly break it down into simpler, 
nutrient-rich manure. You may have seen gardeners in your 
school or in a field near your house collecting dry leaves and 
plant waste and putting them into pits. Do you now understand 
why they do this? It is to make natural manure.
Ancient Indian texts, particularly the Vedas, have references of 
the word ‘Krimi’ which means different tiny entities including 
‘Drishya’ (visible) and ‘Adrishya’ (invisible). Various Vedic texts 
mention their beneficial and harmful effects. 
Atharvaveda also refers to ‘Krimi’. 
Our scientific heritage
If you look around carefully, you might see decaying plants 
and fallen leaves stored in a container or lying in the garden, 
disappear after some time from the surroundings. This is because 
microorganisms breakdown the complex substances of fallen 
leaves into simpler substances that are rich in nutrients—a 
process called decomposition. These nutrients go back to the soil 
and help plants grow better. Microorganisms also decompose 
bodies of dead animals. So, microbes help recycle the waste and 
return important nutrients to nature. Manure formation occurs 
at optimal temperature and appropriate moisture level.
Isn’t it interesting? By now, you must have understood that 
bacteria and some fungi are types of microorganisms that play 
an important role in our lives. And guess what, these helpful 
bacteria can also decompose animal wastes like dung!
From Activity 2.7, we can also infer that microorganisms not 
only help in plant growth, but also clean our environment by 
breaking down waste.
Fig. 2.10: Recycling of nutrients by making 
manure
Chapter 2.indd 19 16-09-2025 04:41:24
Reprint 2026-27
