20
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Now, think what would have happened if microorganisms did 
not exist on Earth?
A step further
Microbes as a source of biogas
Many microorganisms, like bacteria and fungi, live in an oxygen￾free environment. Some of these bacteria have the ability to 
decompose plant and animal waste present in the environment or 
household wastewater. During the process, they release a mixture 
of gases called biogas primarily composed of carbon dioxide, and 
a high proportion of another gas, methane. This gas has been used 
as a fuel source for cooking, heating, generating electricity, and to 
even run vehicles.
Be a scientist
Ananda Mohan Chakrabarty (1938–2020) was a 
scientist who studied bacteria. In 1971, he developed 
a special bacterium that could break down oil spills, 
helping to clean the environment. His discovery 
received a patent in 1980. Patent is a copyright 
given to a person so that no one else can copy, use 
or sell his/her invention without permission. His 
work showed how microorganisms could be used 
to solve environmental problems like pollution. He 
is remembered for his contributions to science and for protecting the 
environment using microbes. What are the other problems which you 
think can be solved with the help of microorganisms? 
How does the diversity of microorganisms help in our kitchen?
2.4.2 Microorganisms and food
Let us try to understand by performing activities in the kitchen.
Activity 2.8: Let us perform
z Take two bowls A and B.
z In each, take 200 g of flour (atta or maida) and add a pinch 
of sugar.
z Now, in bowl A, add a small amount of yeast powder and mix 
it well with the flour.
z In bowl B, do not add any yeast, so that we can compare the 
results of the two bowls.
z Knead the flour of the two bowls with warm water to make 
soft dough (Fig. 2.11).
 (a) Dough in bowl A
(b) Dough in bowl B
Fig. 2.11: Change in the 
volume of flour after 
addition of yeast, sugar, and 
warm water
Chapter 2.indd 20 10-Sep-25 11:16:33 AM
Reprint 2026-27
