Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 21
z Cover the dough with a damp cloth and keep it in a warm place.
z Observe both the bowls after 4–5 hours.
Did you find any change in the volume, smell, or texture of the 
dough? If not, leave the dough for some more time. After some time, 
you may notice that the dough in bowl A, where yeast was added, has 
risen slightly, become fluffy, and has a different smell compared to 
the dough kneaded without yeast. Why does this happen? What is the 
role of yeast? Why did we add sugar and warm water to the flour?
Yeast is a type of microorganism. It belongs to a group 
of microorganisms, called fungi. Yeast grows well in warm 
conditions. You may recall from chapter ‘Life Process in Animals’ 
in Grade 7 that, like other organisms, yeast also respires and breaks 
down food to release energy for their growth and carry out life 
processes. During this process, carbon dioxide is released, which 
forms bubbles that makes the dough soft and fluffy. Yeast also 
produces a small amount of alcohol during this process, which 
gives the dough a slightly different smell. This special property of 
yeast is used in the process of making breads, cakes, and more! 
In addition to yeast, some bacteria, such as Lactobacillus, help in 
fermentation of batter for making idli and dosa, and dough for 
making bhatura.
Activity 2.9: Let us prepare
z Take two small glass bowls—label them ‘A’ and ‘B’.
z Pour lukewarm milk in bowl A, and cold milk in bowl B.
z Now, add a small spoonful of curd to each bowl and mix well 
using a spoon.
z Cover both bowls. Keep bowl A in a warm place and bowl B in 
a cool place (like a refrigerator) for a few hours or overnight.
z Observe the changes in the glass bowls. Write your predictions 
and observations in Table 2.4.
Table 2.4: Testing for curd formation using milk in 
different conditions
Change in the 
appearance of milk
Change in the 
colour of milk Possible 
reason
Bowl A Bowl B Bowl A Bowl B
Prediction
Observation
Chapter 2.indd 21 6/30/2025 4:19:48 PM
Reprint 2026-27
