22
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
You will observe that in bowl 
A, the milk has turned into curd 
after a few hours and has become 
little sour. Whereas in bowl B, the 
milk has not curdled, but it might 
be a little sour. Do you know why 
this happens? The curd contains 
several types of bacteria. One 
of them is Lactobacillus. This 
bacterium feeds on the sugar in 
the milk (lactose), multiplies, and 
ferments the milk to form curd. 
Instead of producing alcohol (like 
yeast), these bacteria produce 
lactic acid, which makes curd 
sour. These bacteria grow well in warm conditions. That is why 
curd is formed in bowl A but not in bowl B.
We can categorise the microorganisms into different 
categories, such as protozoa, fungi, bacteria, some algae, and 
more. Some bacteria, such as Rhizobium, form the swollen 
regions called nodules and live in them as shown in Fig. 2.12. 
Roots of certain legumes, such as beans, peas, and lentils have 
root nodules that contain Rhizobium bacteria. These bacteria 
trap nitrogen from the air and make it useful for the plants. 
This helps plants grow better without chemical fertilisers. 
That is why farmers grow legumes in rotation with other crops. 
This naturally increases the nitrogen in the soil and keeps it
healthy for the next crop.
2.4.3 Amazing microalgae: tiny helpers in water 
Microalgae are microscopic plant-like organisms that live in 
water, soil, air, and even on trees. They make their own food using 
sunlight. While doing this, they also release oxygen and produce 
more than half of the Earth’s oxygen supply. They are rich in 
nutrients and serve as a food source for many aquatic animals. 
Some, like Spirulina, Chlorella, and Diatoms, are also used by 
humans as health supplements and medicines. Microalgae also 
help in cleaning water and are used to make biofuel.
However, pollution, climate change, and habitat destruction are 
threatening microalgal diversity and abundance. It is important 
to conserve these tiny organisms to protect the environment and 
maintain oxygen balance on Earth.
Fig. 2.12: Root nodules of Cowpea 
plant which contain Rhizobium
Chapter 2.indd 22 6/30/2025 4:19:48 PM
Reprint 2026-27
