Chapter 2 — The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye 23
Ever heard of ...
Spirulina, a microalga, is called a superfood 
because of its health benefits. Spirulina is also 
a good source of vitamin B12, which is essential 
for our body. It is rich in protein—more than 
60 per cent of its body weight—and only a 
small amount of fat and sugar. 
Nowadays, farming of Spirulina is becoming a feasible livelihood 
opportunity. You can grow Spirulina easily by following these steps:
1. Set a clear glass tank in a bright place away from direct sunlight.
2. Cover the tank with a shade net, or keep the tank at a place with 
moderate temperature conditions.
3. Fill the tank with pond water.
4. Add living Spirulina collected from a 
pond.
5. Stir the growing Spirulina twice a week.
6. After 3–6 weeks, Spirulina may be 
harvested from the tank by filtering it 
through a fine cloth.
Conservation of microalgae is a good practice for ensuring food 
security and livelihood development.
2.5 Why Is Cell Considered to Be a Basic Unit 
of Life?
The body of all living organisms are made up of tiny building 
blocks called cells. A single cell contains various components 
that help organisms perform various functions. The bodies of all 
plants and animals are made up of many cells. Therefore, they are 
called multicellular (many-celled) organisms. In multicellular 
organisms, cells carry out specialised functions individually but 
also cooperate with each other to increase the chance of survival.
Some microorganisms, such as bacteria 
and protozoa, are made up of just one cell. 
These are called unicellular (single-celled) 
organisms. They carry out all the functions 
necessary for their survival in a single cell. 
Other microbes, like algae and fungi, are 
made up of one or more cells. For example, 
yeast is a unicellular fungus while mould is 
a multicellular fungus.
Nucleoid
Fig. 2.13: A bacterial cell showing the 
nucleoid region
Chapter 2.indd 23 24-Sep-25 1:24:43 PM
Reprint 2026-27
