Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
2
Exploration, of course, isn’t just about discovering new facts 
or learning about diff erent things in nature. Science, as we said 
in Grade 6, is a process, so it is about a way of thinking that 
welcomes curiosity, asks questions, and is open to the unknown. 
In Grade 7, we will try to ask deeper questions: How do things 
work? Why do events happen the way they do? And what can 
we learn from the patterns that we see in nature? 
To do this, we have to step out of this book, step out of the 
classroom perhaps, and experience the world through activities 
and experiments. These are experiences that we hope will not 
just be interesting or exciting but also serve as stepping stones 
to a deeper understanding of the environment we live in and of 
our place on this planet. We believe that this will also help you 
to see science as an ongoing process of discovery. And not just 
about discovery alone, but also about responsibility. As young 
science explorers, you will soon see how human activities are 
linked to what happens in the natural world and are connected 
to the society we live in. You will, we hope, also see the role that 
science can play in addressing environmental challenges and 
help in creating a more sustainable world. 
But let’s get back into this book for now. You will read about 
topics in diff erent fi elds of science, from physics and chemistry 
to biology and earth sciences. While they might appear as 
diff erent chapters, just as we had said in Grade 6, they are 
all interconnected. Scientifi c ideas in one area often inspire 
discoveries in another, or at least allow us to ask questions in 
another area. So, let’s take a quick journey through our book for 
this year. We will start by looking at the properties of materials 
around us, mostly the things we experience but perhaps never 
ask questions about — why are some fruits sour? What happens 
when we wash a haldi stain on our school uniform? 
Chapter 1.indd 2 4/3/2025 4:50:07 PM
Reprint 2026-27
