Chapter 11 — Keeping Time with the Skies 171
It was Makar Sankranti, and Meera was in Ahmedabad for the 
Patang Mahotsav, the International Kite Festival. As she looked 
up at the sky filled with colourful kites, she noticed the Moon 
shining during the daytime. She was surprised as she had always 
thought the Moon appeared only at night. Also, the Moon did 
not appear like a full circle, but that didn’t surprise her as much. 
She knew its shape changed every night. Still, it got her thinking. 
She remembered learning that the Moon is spherical and shines 
by reflecting sunlight. Then why isn’t the whole Moon visible 
every night? For a moment, she wondered if it was due to a 
lunar eclipse. But eclipses are rare and brief. So, what causes the 
Moon’s changing shape?
11.1 How Does the Moon’s Appearance 
Change and Why?
Let us carefully watch the Moon to understand how its 
appearance changes over a month. You may have done a similar 
activity earlier, but let us now do it in more detail. Begin this 
activity from the sunrise after a full Moon day, that is when it is 
easiest to spot the Moon in the sky.
Activity 11.1: Let us explore*
z Spot the Moon at sunrise in the western direction on the first 
day after the full Moon.
z Make a table similar to Table 11.1 in your notebook. Document 
the following:
{ Date
{ When you saw the Moon (at sunrise or sunset)?
{ Shade the corresponding Circle with pencil to show the 
bright portion of the Moon as shown in Fig. 11.1.
z From the second day onwards also document the following.
{ Is the size of bright portion of the Moon increasing or 
decreasing from the previous day.
{ Whether the Moon appears closer to or farther from the 
Sun in the sky than the day before.
z After about 15 days, you may not be able to see the Moon at 
sunrise or sunset. For the next 15 days, carry out this activity 
at sunset.
Fig. 11.1: Shading 
the dark portion 
of the Moon
* It is best to begin this activity a month or more before this chapter 
is scheduled to be learnt.
Chapter 11.indd 171 6/28/2025 6:04:29 PM
Reprint 2026-27
