Chapter 11 — Keeping Time with the Skies 173
waxing period. In India, the waning period of the Moon is generally 
called the Krishna Paksha, while the waxing period is called the 
Shukla Paksha. The Moon goes through a waning period followed by 
a waxing period in a cyclical manner as shown in Fig. 11.2. The cycle 
from one full Moon to the next takes about a month.
The changing shapes of the bright portion of the Moon from 
one day to another as seen from the Earth are called the phases 
of the Moon.
11.1.2 Locating the Moon
When you checked the Moon at the same time on successive 
days (for example, at sunrise), did you see it in a different part 
of the sky? On a full Moon day, the Moon is nearly opposite the 
Sun—when the Sun rises in the East, the Moon is almost setting 
in the West. On subsequent mornings at sunrise, as its bright 
part continues to decrease, the Moon appears to move closer in 
the sky to the Sun. When the bright part of the Moon decreases 
to a half circle shape, the Moon is overhead at Sunrise. A few 
days later, the crescent Moon appears even closer to the Sun. 
Knowing the phase of the Moon and whether it is waxing or 
waning can thus help us find out where and when to look for 
the Moon on any given day. A waxing Moon is easiest to spot at 
sunset, and a waning Moon at sunrise. Because of these shifts, 
the Moon always rises and sets at different times than the Sun.
A step further
Many people believe the Moon rises when the Sun sets, but that 
is not always true. Look in a local newspaper or on the Positional 
Astronomy Centre (India Meteorological Department) website to find 
the moonrise time in your area. Check these times for several days 
in a row and you will see that the Moon rises about 50 minutes later 
each day. Sometimes moonrise happens in the afternoon (around 
2:00–4:00 p.m.), so you can spot the Moon in the eastern sky during 
daylight. You may need to wait about 30 minutes past the listed 
moonrise time for the Moon to climb high enough for it to be seen.
The time and position of moonrise changes from one day to the next.
7 April 2025
14:23
8 April 2025
15:17
Chapter 11.indd 173 6/28/2025 6:04:43 PM
Reprint 2026-27
