174
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
11.1.3 Making sense of our observations
The shape of the Moon itself does not change, only what 
we see changes. You may recall learning earlier that the 
Moon does not emit light of its own, but shines because it 
reflects sunlight that falls on it. The half of the Moon that 
faces the Sun receives sunlight and becomes illuminated 
(Fig. 11.3). The other half facing away from the Sun does 
not receive sunlight and remains non-illuminated.
The Moon revolves around the Earth and, only one 
half of the Moon always faces the Earth. However, the 
portion of the Moon facing the Earth is not always its 
illuminated part. We can only see the illuminated portion 
of the Moon from Earth. Sometimes, the entire illuminated portion 
of the Moon faces the Earth, and at other times only a part of it. 
At such times the illuminated portion of the Moon that we see is 
not a full circle. On New Moon day, we do not see the illuminated 
portion of the Moon at all, as only the non-illuminated portion of 
the Moon faces the Earth. Therefore, the Moon appears different 
on different days.
Let us do an activity to understand how the 
illuminated portion of the Moon, as seen by us, 
changes when its position changes with respect 
to the Sun.
Activity 11.2: Let us explore
z Take a small soft ball and insert a stick into it (Fig. 11.4a). 
This represents the Moon.
z Go to a dark open place (at night), and ask a teacher or 
guardian to shine a torchlight towards you from about
3 m to represent light coming from the Sun or stand near an 
electric lamp. Your head represents the Earth.
z Now hold the ball at arm’s length in one hand such that it is 
slightly above your head as shown in Fig. 11.4b. Keep the ball at 
position E towards the direction of the lamp. Does the portion 
of the ball facing you appear to be illuminated or not?
z Turn around slowly, in the anti-clockwise direction, with your 
arm outstretched as shown in Fig. 11.4b and keep looking at 
the ball. Does the shape of the illuminated portion change? 
Is the line separating the illuminated and non-illuminated 
portions of the ball curved?
z Was your observation similar to the changing shape of the 
illuminated portion of ball shown in Fig. 11.4c? The shape of 
the illuminated portion of the ball, as seen by you, changes 
depending on where the ball is with respect to the lamp. 
Fig. 11.3: Sunlight falling on 
the Moon
Sunrays
Illuminated Non￾illuminated
Why does the illuminated 
portion of the Moon seen 
from the Earth decrease 
when it appears closer 
to the Sun?
Fig. 11.4: (a) Ball with stick
Chapter 11.indd 174 6/28/2025 6:04:51 PM
Reprint 2026-27
