180
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
11.2.2 Solar calendars
It was important to know the arrival of seasons for agricultural 
purposes. This need for a year to synchronise with seasons led to 
the creation of solar calendars. The Gregorian calendar, widely 
used today, is a solar calendar. The months in solar calendars are 
adjusted to add up to 365 days. That is why in Gregorian calendars, 
some months have 30 days, others 31, and February has only 
28 days.
On top of the 365 days, the Earth takes nearly an extra quarter 
of a day to complete one revolution around the Sun. These extra 
hours add up to approximately one day every four years. To 
adjust for this, solar calendars add an extra day every four years 
using the concept of a leap year. In the Gregorian calendar, if a 
year is divisible by four, then an extra leap day is added. So in a 
leap year, February has 29 days, which keeps the calendar well 
synchronised with the seasons.
A step further
The Earth takes slightly less time than 365 and a quarter day to 
go from one spring equinox to the next spring equinox. Adding a 
day every four years helps to synchronise with the seasons, but 
it actually adds a little too much over time. To fix this, leap years 
are skipped every 100 years—like in 1700, 1800, and 1900. But 
skipping all of them would make the calendar lag slightly behind. 
So every 400 years, a leap year is again added back—like in 1600 
and 2000. These careful corrections keep the calendar closely 
matched with the seasons over long periods of time!
A step further
As we learnt earlier, seasons are caused by the Earth’s revolution 
around the Sun and its movement from the spring equinox to 
winter equinox and back. The time between successive spring 
equinoxes is called the tropical year. Gregorian calendar is based 
upon tropical year.
We have also learnt earlier that the stars that rise at sunset 
change throughout the year due to the Earth’s revolution around 
the Sun. The time duration required for the same stars to rise 
again at sunset is called the sidereal year, and it can also be used to 
define a solar calendar. The sidereal year is longer than the tropical 
year by a mere 20 minutes, and so it takes a long time before 
the differences between the two calendars become noticeable. 
In modern times, astronomers use the sidereal year to keep track of 
the Earth’s position in its orbit around the Sun.
Chapter 11.indd 180 6/28/2025 6:05:48 PM
Reprint 2026-27
