Chapter 11 — Keeping Time with the Skies 183
Ever heard of ...
In 1952, the Government of India set up a Calendar Reform 
Committee (CRC) to examine all existing calendars which were 
being followed in the country at that time and to recommend an 
accurate and uniform calendar for the whole of India. The CRC 
recommended ‘Unified National Calendar’ was adopted for use 
with effect from 21 March 1956 CE, that is, 1 Chaitra 1878 Saka.
The Indian National Calendar follows the general principles as that 
of the Surya Siddhanta.
Be a scientist
Meghnad Saha (1893–1956)
Meghnad Saha was a pioneering astrophysicist of 
India who studied stars and their temperatures and 
developed a mathematical equation, famously known 
as the Saha equation. The Saha Institute of Nuclear 
Physics, in Kolkata, is named after him. He was also 
the chairperson of the Calendar Reform Committee.
11.3 Are Festivals Related to Astronomical 
Phenomena?
Many Indian festivals are tied to the phases 
of the Moon and hence are based on either 
lunar or luni-solar calendars. For instance, 
Diwali falls on the new Moon of the month of 
Kartika, Holi on the full Moon of Phalguna, 
Buddha Purnima on the full Moon of Vaisakha, Eid-ul-Fitr is 
celebrated after sighting the crescent Moon at the end of the 
month of Ramazan, while Dussehra is celebrated on the tenth 
day in the month of Ashwina. Hence, they occur on different dates 
in the Gregorian calendar in successive years.
For festivals based on luni-solar calendars, the Gregorian 
calendar dates can shift, but this shift is typically less than 
a month. This is because the luni-solar calendars add the 
intercalary month every few years which correct for the 
difference between the lunar and the solar year. In contrast, 
purely lunar calendars do not account for this difference.
Any festival celebrated according to the phases of the Moon, 
such as Eid-ul-fitr, therefore can occur in different months of
the Gregorian calendar year after year.
Why do most Indian 
festivals fall on different 
dates every year?
Chapter 11.indd 183 6/28/2025 6:06:07 PM
Reprint 2026-27
