184
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
A step further
A few festivals in India, like Makar Sankranti, Pongal, Bihu, Vaisakhi, 
Poila Baisakh, and Puthandu, follow a solar sidereal calendar. 
These festivals happen on almost the same date every year in the 
Gregorian calendar which is based on the tropical year.
A long time ago, these festivals were tied to either a solstice or 
an equinox. Due to the small difference in the sidereal and tropical 
years, the dates of these festivals slowly shift away from the 
solstices/equinoxes. This shift is due to slow wobble of the Earth’s 
axis, similar to the movement of the axis of a wobbling top. 
This causes the dates of festivals based on the sidereal calendar 
to move ahead in tropical calendar. For example, Makar Sankranti
moves ahead by one day every 71 years.
Ever heard of ...
The dates of many Indian festivals are based on the exact lunar 
phase at sunrise. As sunrise occurs earlier in Eastern India and 
later in Western India, these dates can also shift by a day between 
these regions even in the same year. To maintain uniformity 
throughout the country, the Positional Astronomy Center of the 
Government of India annually publishes the Rashtriya panchang, 
a detailed calculation of the positions of celestial objects, such as 
the Moon and the Sun for a central location in India. Based on 
these calculations, it provides an advance intimation on dates of 
festivals to Government of India for holiday declaration.
Ever heard of ...
The Moon and moonlight have inspired ragas in Indian classical 
music. Chandrakauns, Chandranandan, and Shubhapantuvarali
(which also means “auspicious moon”) are a few ragas that display 
the moon’s imagery in their names and melodic expressions. 
Similarly, mudras (hand gestures), for example, Chandrakala, and 
Ardhachandran relating to the Moon can be found in Indian classical 
dance Bharatanatyam.
The same is true for other dance forms—Kathak, Odissi, and 
Kuchipudi. Even the 
traditional painting styles: 
Madhubani, Warli, and other 
forms of art, such as sculpture 
and pottery among Saura, 
Gond and other tribes invoke 
depictions of the Moon and 
the Sun prominently implying 
their significance in daily life. Dhokra Brass 
sculpture
Warli painting
Chapter 11.indd 184 6/28/2025 6:06:24 PM
Reprint 2026-27
