Chapter 4 — Electricity: Magnetic and Heating Effects 47
It was the day of the science exhibition, and the school was 
buzzing with energy. Mohini and Aakarsh, along with their 
friends, went from one exhibit to another, eagerly exploring 
different models, asking questions and taking notes. One simple 
model really fascinated them. It was a working model of a lifting 
electromagnet which was displayed by their senior, Sumana. 
In it, instead of a hook like a typical crane, there was an iron 
nail wrapped with a wire, which was connected to a battery. 
When Sumana closed the circuit, the nail picked up iron paper 
clips like a magnet. When she opened the circuit, the clips fell 
off. Mohini and Aakarsh, were surprised. They remembered 
learning earlier (in the chapter ‘Exploring Magnets’, Curiosity,
Grade 6) that magnetic materials were attracted by magnet and 
that iron was a magnetic material. But in Sumana’s model, there 
was no magnet, only an electric circuit. They were so excited that 
they wanted to try it out themselves.
4.1 Does an Electric Current Have a Magnetic 
Effect? 
Activity 4.1: Let us investigate
z Collect a magnetic compass, an electric cell, a cell holder, 
two drawing pins, a safety pin, two nails, two pieces of 
connecting wires (one longer and one shorter), and two 
small pieces of cardboard. 
z Using two drawing pins, a safety pin, and a cardboard 
piece, make a switch (as you made it earlier in the 
chapter ‘Electricity: Circuits and their Components’ in 
Curiosity, Grade 7).
z Place the cell in the cell holder. 
z Fix two nails to a piece of cardboard as shown in 
Fig. 4.1a. Fix the middle portion of the longer wire 
stretched between the nails, such that it is slightly above 
the surface of the cardboard. Attach one end of that 
wire to the cell holder and another end to the switch.
z Connect the second wire between the cell holder and 
the switch.
z Place the magnetic compass beneath the wire between 
the two nails (Fig. 4.1a). Fig. 4.1: An electric circuit 
and a magnetic compass
(b)
(a)
Chapter 4.indd 47 6/28/2025 3:49:32 PM
Reprint 2026-27
