48
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
While watching the compass needle, move the switch to 
‘ON’ position to allow electric current to flow through the wire 
(Fig. 4.1b). What do you observe? 
z Now again while watching the compass needle, move the 
switch to ‘OFF’ position. What do you observe this time? 
z Move the switch between ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ positions a few more 
times. Carefully observe how the compass needle behaves 
the each time.
You may have noticed that when the current flows, the compass 
needle gets deflected from its original direction. When the current 
stops, the needle returns to its original direction. 
As we have learnt earlier (in the chapter ‘Exploring Magnets’ 
in Curiosity, Grade 6), the compass needle is a tiny magnet which 
deflects when a magnet is brought near it and this magnetic effect 
can act through any non-magnetic materials kept in between. 
But why does the compass needle deflect when the current 
flows through the wire? The deflection indicates that the current 
carrying wire has a magnetic effect on the compass needle. 
When the current stops, this magnetic effect disappears and 
the compass needle returns to its original direction. The region 
around a magnet or a current carrying wire where its magnetic 
effect can be felt, such as by the deflection of a compass needle, 
is said to have a magnetic field.
When electric current flows 
through a conductor (like a wire), it 
produces a magnetic field around it. 
This phenomenon is known as the 
magnetic effect of electric current. 
The magnetic field disappears when 
the current stops flowing.
Be a scientist 
You have just now made the same discovery which 
was made by the scientist Hans Christian Oersted 
(1777–1851) in 1820, that is, the discovery that 
electricity and magnetism are linked. He was a 
professor at a university in Denmark. It is said that 
once while giving a demonstration, he noticed that 
whenever an electrical circuit was closed or 
opened, the needle of a magnetic compass, lying 
nearby, deflected. He investigated this and when he was certain that 
an electric current indeed produced a magnetic field, he published 
his findings. This led to other scientists repeating his experiment to 
check if they got the same results, and further investigating the 
connection between electricity and magnetism. 
We have learnt about magnets 
and electric current in earlier 
grades. I used to think that there 
was no link between the two. But 
now we found that electricity 
and magnetic effect are linked!
Chapter 4.indd 48 6/28/2025 3:49:38 PM
Reprint 2026-27
