Chapter 4 — Electricity: Magnetic and Heating Effects 51
As we have learnt earlier, when two magnets are brought close 
to each other, their unlike poles (North–South) attract each other. 
So, if north pole of the magnetic compass is attracted towards 
end A of the electromagnet, then end A is south pole.
z Repeat this procedure to find the polarity of end B as well 
(Fig. 4.4b). Did you find that the polarity of end B is opposite 
to the polarity of end A?
We learnt in grade 6 that a magnet has two poles. Just like a 
magnet, an electromagnet also has two poles—North and South.
Think like a scientist 
Repeat Activity 4.3 with— (i) 2 and 4 cells with the same coil, (ii) 2 cells but 
different number of turns of the coil. What do you observe?
A single cell provides only a small amount of current, so the magnetic 
field is weak. As a result, the deflection of compass needle is less and the coil 
can only attract a few clips. A battery with more cells gives a larger current 
as compared to that with a single cell. This creates a stronger magnetic field, 
so the deflection of the compass needle is more and the coil can attract 
more clips. The increase in number of turns of the coil also makes the coil a 
stronger magnet! 
Also, repeat Activity 4.4 by changing the direction of the current. 
So, the strength of an electromagnet can be changed by changing the amount 
of electric current flowing through the coil or the number of turns of the coil, 
or both. Also, its poles can be reversed by changing the direction of the current.
Do you remember learning earlier (in the chapter ‘Exploring 
Magnets’ in Curiosity, Grade 6) that a freely suspended magnet rests 
along the north–south direction because our Earth itself behaves 
like a giant magnet? But why does Earth behave like a magnet? Deep 
inside the Earth, the movement of liquid iron in the core creates 
electric currents, which generate a magnetic field. Many migratory 
birds, fish, and animals use this field to navigate across continents 
and oceans. The Earth’s magnetic field also acts as a shield, blocking 
harmful particles from space, and helps protect life on Earth.
A step further
Fig. 4.4: Compass needle near (a) End A; (b) End B of an electromagnet
(a)
A B A B
(b)
Chapter 4.indd 51 6/28/2025 3:49:53 PM
Reprint 2026-27
