52
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
4.1.2 Lifting electromagnets
Lifting electromagnets are strong 
electromagnets, that may be hung to the 
cranes. The crane operator can control the 
magnet by switching the current ON and OFF. When the current 
is turned ON, the electromagnet lifts the iron/steel objects; when 
the current is switched OFF, magnetic field disappears, and the 
objects are released. Lifting electromagnets are widely used in 
factories and scrap yards, to move, lift, and sort heavy metal 
items efficiently.
A step further
We have learnt that when electric current flows through a 
conductor (like a wire), it produces a magnetic field around it. In 
the higher grades, you will learn even more about this wonderful 
link between electricity and magnetism, including the exciting idea 
that just as electricity can produce magnetism, a moving magnet 
can also lead to an electric current. This deep connection between 
electricity and magnetism is vital to our daily lives, as it forms the 
basis of many devices, from electric motors to power generators.
4.2 Does a Current Carrying Wire Get Hot?
Activity 4.5: Let us observe
In this activity, we will use a special kind 
of wire, called a nichrome wire.
z Take a cardboard piece of about 10 cm 
length and 10 cm width, two nails, 
a nichrome wire of thickness about 
0.3 mm (26–28 gauge) and length of 
10 cm, an electric cell, a cell holder, a 
switch, and connecting wires. 
z Mount the nails on the cardboard about 5 cm apart.
z Tie the nichrome wire between these nails and make the 
connections as shown in Fig. 4.5 with the switch in OFF 
position.
z Touch the nichrome wire. What do you feel?
z Move the switch to ON position for about 30 s and then 
move it back to OFF. Touch the nichrome wire momentarily 
While doing the activity for 
electromagnet, did you also 
notice that the wire ends 
got warm? Why would that 
happen?
Are electromagnets also 
used in real life, for 
lifting objects?
Chapter 4.indd 52 6/28/2025 3:49:57 PM
Reprint 2026-27
