Chapter 4 — Electricity: Magnetic and Heating Effects 53
(Do not hold the nichrome wire). 
What difference do you feel?
z Repeat the last two steps to 
confirm the observation.
You may have observed that nichrome wire 
feels warm when current is passed through it. 
This happens because, when electric current 
flows through any conductor, it faces some 
opposition or resistance to its flow. Different 
conductors offer different levels of resistance 
to the flow of current. A nichrome wire, for 
example, offers higher resistance compared to 
a copper wire of the same size and length. This 
resistance causes some of the electrical energy to 
be converted into heat energy. When an electric 
current passes through a conductor, it gets 
heated. This warming is known as the heating 
effect of electric current.
Think like a scientist 
This activity should be carried out strictly under the supervision 
of a teacher.
Repeat Activity 4.5 with a battery of 2 cells. What do you notice? 
For the same duration, does the wire heat up more with one cell or 
two cells?
The amount of heat generated is more in the experiment with 
2 cells. This is due to the fact that the heat generated depends on 
the magnitude of the electric current. The heat generated in a wire 
depends on the material, thickness, length of the wire, and the 
duration for which the current flows. 
In Grade 7, we have learnt that an incandescent lamp glows 
because its filament is heated by an electric current. Many 
household appliances, such as electric room heaters, electric 
stoves, electric kettles, electric irons, 
water heating immersion rods, and 
hair dryers (Fig. 4.6) work on the 
same principle of the heating effect 
of electric current. All these devices 
contain a rod or a coil of wire, 
called a heating element. In some 
appliances where this element is visible, it can be seen glowing 
red hot.
Fig. 4.5: Heating effect in a wire
Oh, now I understand why 
the incandescent torch lamp 
sometimes used to get warm 
when we did the activity 
of making it glow using an 
electric cell.
Safety firstSafety First
Do not touch the wire for an extended 
period to avoid any injuries.
Chapter 4.indd 53 29-Sep-25 12:21:42 PM
Reprint 2026-27
