Chapter 4 — Electricity: Magnetic and Heating Effects 55
Yes, but have you ever wondered 
what is inside these cells and 
batteries that produces electricity?
The portable sources of electricity, 
such as cells and batteries, are so 
fascinating. Using these, we could 
light up a small lamp, make a magnet, 
and heat up a wire.
4.3 How Does a Battery Generate Electricity?
Let us start with one of the earliest types of electric cells ever made.
4.3.1 Voltaic cell
A Voltaic cell, also known as Galvanic cell, is 
shown in Fig. 4.7. It contains two metal rods 
made of different materials and a liquid called an 
electrolyte, placed in a glass or plastic container. 
The rods, called electrodes, are partly dipped in 
the electrolyte, which is usually a weak acid or 
salt solution. A chemical reaction between the 
rods and the electrolyte produces electricity. 
When the circuit is connected, electric current 
flows from the positive terminal through the 
circuit to the negative terminal. Over time, 
the chemicals get used up, and the cell stops 
working. It is then called ‘dead’ and cannot 
supply any more electricity. 
Ever heard of ...
The Voltaic or Galvanic cells get their names from two Italian 
scientists, Alessandro Volta and Luigi Galvani. In the late 1700s, 
Galvani noticed that a dead frog’s leg kicked when touched with 
two different metals—copper and iron. It was already known by 
then that electricity could stimulate muscular motion and Galvani 
thought the electricity came from the frog itself. But Volta had a 
different idea. He believed the electricity came from the metals, and 
not the frog. To test this, he used saltwater-soaked paper instead of 
the frog’s leg and still got an electric current. This showed that it 
was the combination of metals and liquid that generated electric 
current—leading to the invention of the first battery!
Connecting 
wire Electric 
current
Electric 
lamp
Electrode 1
Glass 
container
Electrolyte
(Liquid)
Fig. 4.7: Simple representation of 
a Voltaic cell
Electrode 2
Chapter 4.indd 55 10-Sep-25 3:24:43 PM
Reprint 2026-27
