Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 
16
roots in problems involving land measurement, architectural design, 
and other areas where geometric calculations were necessary. 
In ancient Sanskrit works the term varga was used both for the square 
figure or its area, as well as the square power, and the term ghana was 
used both for the solid cube as well as the product of a number with 
itself three times. The fourth power was called varga-varga . These terms 
were used in India at least from the third century BCE.
Aryabhata (499 CE) states
“A square figure of four equal sides and the number representing its area 
are called varga. The product of two equal quantities is also called varga.”
Thus, the term varga for square power has its origin in the graphical 
representation of a square figure. 
Why is the word ‘root’ (the root of a plant) used for the mathematical 
operation √ (square root, cube root, etc.)?
It is because, in ancient India, the Sanskrit word mula, meaning 
root of a plant, basis, cause, origin, etc., was used for the mathematical 
operations of taking roots.
In Sanskrit, varga-mula (the basis, cause, origin of the square) was 
used for square-root and ghana-mula was used for cube-root. This use of 
mula for the mathematical concept of root was subsequently emulated 
in Arabic and Latin through their corresponding words for the root of 
a plant — jidhr and radix respectively. The term mula for root has been 
used in India at least from the first century BCE. Another term used was 
pada (foot, basis, cause, origin). Brahmagupta (628 CE) explains, ‘The 
pada (root) of a krti (square) is that of which it is a square.’
Figure it Out
1. Find the cube roots of 27000 and 10648.
2. What number will you multiply by 1323 to make it a cube number?
3. State true or false. Explain your reasoning.
(i) The cube of any odd number is even.
(ii) There is no perfect cube that ends with 8.
(iii) The cube of a 2-digit number may be a 3-digit number.
(iv) The cube of a 2-digit number may have seven or more digits.
(v) Cube numbers have an odd number of factors.
4. You are told that 1331 is a perfect cube. Can you guess without 
factorisation what its cube root is? Similarly, guess the cube roots of 
4913, 12167, and 32768.
Chapter 1.indd 16 10-07-2025 14:06:46
Reprint 2026-27
