Chapter 13 — Our Home: Earth, a Unique Life Sustaining Planet 211
We have now reached the final chapter of this book, the 
concluding chapter in our scientific journey through the middle 
stage. It is time to put together all that we have seen and learnt 
and try to understand why our home, planet Earth, is like 
no other place in the known universe. As you have learnt in 
Curiosity, Grades 6 and 7, the Earth is a planet orbiting the Sun. 
However, it is not just any planet. It is a planet that sustains 
life—full of diverse landscapes, from towering mountains 
and vast oceans to endless deserts and lush forests. Today, our 
satellites allow us to take amazing pictures of our planet. The 
image in the beginning page was taken by an Indian Space 
Research Organisation (ISRO) Earth Observation Satellite and 
made by combining nearly 3000 smaller images, like pieces of 
a mosaic. Although it looks beautiful, it’s a false colour image, 
where scientists use different colours to show different types of 
information. These satellite images help us study plants on land 
and tiny organisms in the ocean, and can even detect things 
like ocean temperature, oil spills, and wind direction. In this 
chapter, we will uncover the unique conditions that make Earth 
the perfect home for living beings.
13.1 Why Is Earth a Unique Planet?
What makes the Earth so special? While there are perhaps 
billions of planets in the universe, Earth is the only one where 
life, as we know today, exists and thrives in all its forms.
Have you ever wondered 
where all life on Earth 
actually exists? All the 
mountains, rivers, forests, 
animals, and people are 
found on just a very thin 
layer on the surface of our 
planet. From the tallest 
mountain to the deepest 
ocean trench, the crust, 
where all of life exists, is 
tiny compared to the size of 
Earth. If Earth were the size 
of an apple, the crust would 
be as thin as the apple’s 
skin as shown in Fig. 13.1. 
This delicate, life supporting layer is what makes Earth truly 
special.
crust
Fig. 13.1: The Earth’s crust is like the thin skin of an apple 
Crust
Upper mantle
Lower mantle
Outer core
Inner core
Chapter 13.indd 211 01-07-2025 12:21:24
Reprint 2026-27
