214
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
The air on Venus is almost entirely made up of 
carbon dioxide gas, which does not let the heat 
escape. This is called the greenhouse effect, and
it makes Venus even hotter than Mercury, which is 
relatively closer to the Sun. On the Earth also, gases 
like carbon dioxide in the atmosphere trap heat 
by absorbing the radiation given off by the Earth, 
after it gets warmed by the Sun. Thus, greenhouse 
effect plays an important role in maintaining just 
the right temperature on Earth (Fig. 13.2).
A step further
The greenhouse effect that causes 
a planet like Venus and Earth to 
trap heat does not work the same 
way as a greenhouse for growing 
plants in a cool climate. On Venus 
or Earth, gases like carbon dioxide 
in the atmosphere trap heat by 
absorbing the radiation given off 
by the Earth, after it gets warmed 
by the Sun. A plant greenhouse, on 
the other hand, traps warmed air 
simply because it is a closed space, usually with glass walls (Fig. 13.3). 
It heats up during the day, but the air stays in and the heat does not 
escape easily. So while both keep things warm, they do it differently!
Fig. 13.3: Greenhouse for plants
13.3 What Makes the Earth Suitable for Life to 
 Exist ?
13.3.1 Position of the Earth
The most important reason why the Earth 
can support life is its distance from the 
Sun. It is just at the right distance, where 
the temperature allows water to exist in a 
liquid form. If the Earth were closer to the 
Sun, it would be too hot and all the water 
would evaporate; if it were farther away, 
it would be too cold, and all the water 
would freeze. In such extreme conditions, 
it would have been impossible for most 
life forms—especially plants, animals, and 
humans—to grow and thrive on Earth. 
Although some microbes, like certain 
 Fig. 13.4: The habitable zone 
around a star
Habitable zone
Too hot Just right Too cold
Fig. 13.2: Schematic of greenhouse 
effect on Earth
Chapter 13.indd 214 11-Sep-25 2:54:59 PM
Reprint 2026-27
