216
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
sunlight and heat nearly steady throughout the year, preventing 
extreme summers and winters at most places. 
However, moderate temperature due to the right distance 
from the Sun isn’t the only factor that makes the Earth habitable. 
The planet is also the right size to support an atmosphere. As you 
learnt earlier, the atmosphere is the layer of gases that surrounds 
the Earth, and it plays a major role in sustaining life. You also 
learnt in Chapter 5 that the Earth’s gravity pulls objects towards it. 
If Earth were much smaller (but with the same average density), 
its gravity would have been too weak to hold on to the gases in 
our atmosphere, and they would have escaped into space. On 
Mars, the atmosphere is 100 times thinner than on Earth, and 
Mercury has no atmosphere at all.
On the other hand, if the planet was too large, and gravity was 
much stronger, it would perhaps pull us down to the planet with 
such a large force that our bones could get crushed! Due to the 
right size of the Earth, it is able to support atmosphere which is 
essential for life.
The presence of oxygen in the Earth’s atmosphere allows us 
to breathe, and is needed by almost all forms of life on Earth. 
But oxygen has another important role. Some of the oxygen in 
our atmosphere, gets converted to another form called ozone 
(a three-atom oxygen molecule), and forms an important part 
of the atmosphere called the ozone layer. This layer acts like a 
shield, blocking harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays from the Sun that 
can damage living cells.
Our scientific heritage
India’s Mangalyaan (Mars 
Orbiter Mission), launched 
in 2013 by Indian Space 
Research Organisation (ISRO), 
was a big step in exploring 
Mars (Fig. 13.7). It carried 
tools to study the planet’s 
atmosphere, surface, and signs 
of past water. Some of these 
sensors help scientists ask 
big questions—like was Mars 
ever suitable for life? Mangalyaan showed the world that India could 
do space science with smart, low-cost technology—and it helped bring 
Mars closer to all of us.
Fig. 13.7: Mangalyaan
Chapter 13.indd 216 6/28/2025 6:15:58 PM
Reprint 2026-27
