Chapter 13 — Our Home: Earth, a Unique Life Sustaining Planet 217
13.3.3 Magnetic field of the Earth
In Curiosity, Grade 6, we learnt that 
a freely suspended magnet always 
settles in a fixed direction. This is 
because the Earth itself behaves 
like a giant magnet. You have also 
seen in Chapter 4 that the region around a magnet where its 
effect is felt has a magnetic field. It is believed that the movement 
of molten iron in Earth’s core may be the origin for Earth’s 
magnetic field. 
Earth is constantly hit by tiny, high-energy particles that 
come from space. Some come from far across the universe and 
are called cosmic rays. Other particles come from the Sun and 
are called the solar wind. These particles can be harmful as they 
can damage the atmosphere, reduce the ozone layer, and let in 
more harmful UV rays, which can affect life on Earth.
Thankfully, the Earth’s magnetic field acts like a protective 
shield. It pushes many of these harmful particles away from the 
Earth, keeping our atmosphere, and hence life on our planet safe.
Earth’s unique position in the solar system—allows the 
presence of liquid water—along with its size, atmosphere, and 
magnetic field, all help make it a planet where life can emerge 
and thrive.
But, how is life supported and 
sustained on Earth?
Does the magnetic field of 
the Earth have any role in 
sustaining life on Earth?
13.4 What Allows Life to Be Sustained on Earth?
Earth has the right conditions for life, but it is the beautiful 
connections between living and non-living things that help life to 
thrive. In Curiosity, Grades 6 and 7, you learnt about key natural 
resources, such as, air, water, sunlight, soil, and minerals. 
You also learnt about the important life processes in plants and 
animals. Now, let us explore how all these elements interact to 
support and sustain life on Earth.
13.4.1 Air, water, and sunlight
We know that the atmosphere contains oxygen, which humans, 
animals, and plants use for respiration. In the presence of 
sunlight, plants take carbon dioxide from the air and water from 
Chapter 13.indd 217 6/28/2025 6:15:59 PM
Reprint 2026-27
