220
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
called genetic material or genes, are stored inside every cell of 
a living being. You can think of genes as a detailed instruction 
manual inside each cell. Some instructions tell the cell how to 
make blood, while others guide the formation of bones, muscles, 
or skin. Together, these instructions ensure that a calf grows into 
a cow, or a kitten grows into a cat.
But reproduction does more than just create more of the same kind 
of living beings. It also allows for small changes in the instructions 
that are passed down from parents to offpsrings. Sometimes, these 
changes help a plant or animal survive better in a new environment. 
For example, over time, camels developed humps to store fat and 
survive in deserts. Even microbes evolve—some bacteria, as you 
learnt in the chapter on health, have become resistant to antibiotics, 
helping them persist. Over many generations, such changes can lead 
to new features—or even completely new types of living beings. So, 
reproduction not only keeps each kind continuing, but also helps 
life adapt change, and continue in new forms (Fig. 13.10).
But how can the same process lead both to similarity (an animal 
gives birth to similar individual, such as a cow gives birth to a 
cow) and variation (shows different characteristics like difference 
in colour and height of individuals of 
some kind)? That is a fascinating puzzle. 
There are two types of reproductive 
processes—one in which the young 
are almost exactly like their parent 
and another in which they look slightly 
different from their parents.
In asexual reproduction, a single 
parent produces new individuals that 
are exact copies of itself (exact in terms of the instructions inside 
the cell). In sexual reproduction, instructions from two parents 
combine to create offspring that are not exactly like either of 
the parent. They share some traits with both parents, but also 
have differences. This mixing helps keep useful features while 
allowing new ones to appear. Over many generations, these 
small differences can add up—leading to big differences, and 
even new life forms.
Let’s explore how reproduction takes place in plants and 
animals, and how it helps living beings develop special features 
and sometimes change over time. 
13.5.1 Asexual reproduction
Many plants can reproduces when any part of the plants—leaf, 
stem, or root—is planted in soil. This kind of reproduction is 
called vegetative propagation.
Fig. 13.10: Development of calf to cow
Chapter 13.indd 220 17-09-2025 02:07:29
Reprint 2026-27
