Chapter 13 — Our Home: Earth, a Unique Life Sustaining Planet 221
Can you observe and list some 
plants around you that grow this 
way?
Activity 13.3: Let us find out
z Take some parts of plants like stem cutting of a money plant, 
the ‘eyes’ of a sprouted potato, or a piece of ginger (Fig. 13.11b).
z Plant each of them separately in moist soil (not too deep). For 
money plant, you can just put a cutting in a glass container 
which makes it easy to observe.
z Make sure they get all the conditions they need to grow—like 
water, air, and sunlight.
z Watch them every day and note how many days it takes for 
roots stem and leaves to appear. Also observe when the first 
new leaf appears.
Ever heard of ...
Not just plants – microbes and simple animals also reproduce 
asexually. For example, single-celled organisms like bacteria and 
amoebae divide into two identical individuals. Some multicellular 
organisms like algae can regrow from small cut parts. 
Hydra, another simple animal, grows tiny buds on its 
body that break off and grow into new individuals.
Planaria, a type of flatworm, can regrow from just 
a small piece of their body! Scientists study them to 
understand regeneration in animals.
Ever heard of ...
Not just plants—microbes and simple animals also reproduce 
asexually. For example, single-celled organisms like bacteria and 
amoeba divide into two identical individuals. Some multicellular 
organisms like algae can regrow from small cut parts. 
Hydra, another simple animal, grows tiny buds on its 
body that breaks off and grow into new individuals.
Planaria (Fig. 13.12), a type of flatworm, can 
regrow from a fragment of its body! Scientists study 
this organism to understand regeneration in animals.
Fig. 13.12: Planaria
13.5.2 Sexual reproduction 
In this type of reproduction, two parents are involved—usually 
called male and female. This is easy to observe in animals, but 
did you know even flowering plants have male and female parts? 
Some microorganisms like bacteria and yeast also have two 
‘mating types’ that act like the two parents.
Special cells for reproduction
You might wonder if both parents pass on their genetic material 
for making a new organism, won’t the child end up with double 
the amount of instructions? And would not this keep doubling 
every generation?
This does not happen because each parent makes specialised 
reproductive cells, called gametes. These carry only half of the 
parent’s genetic material . When male and female gametes join, 
they form a new cell with a complete set of instructions—half 
from each parent.
How do bamboo and sugarcane 
grow into new plants? I have 
never seen their seeds.
Fig. 13.11: Vegetative 
propagation — (a) 
Ginger; (b) Potato
(b) 
(a) 
Chapter 13.indd 221 6/28/2025 6:16:14 PM
Reprint 2026-27
