222
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Babies do not look exactly like their mother or father. Even 
brothers and sisters in the same family can look different from 
each other. This is because every baby gets a mix of genetic 
information from both parents through gametes. Each gamete 
carries a different set of instructions for things like eye colour, hair 
type, and more. These instructions mix in different ways when 
the sperm and eggs joins to form a baby. These instructions mix 
in different ways each time, so each child is unique. No wonder 
one child may ‘inherit’ a nose similar to mother and another may 
inherit eyes similar to father. It all depends on which pieces of 
the parent’s ‘instruction book set’ came together.
Sexual reproduction in plants
Plants use different parts of their flowers to produce 
male and female gametes. Pollen grains found inside the 
anther of a flower are the male gametes, while ovules, 
found deep inside the flower, are the female gametes. 
Pollen is carried to another flower by wind, insects, or 
animals—this process is called pollination. When the 
male and female gametes combine, it is called fertilisation, 
forming a zygote that becomes the seed. The fleshy part of the 
flower around the ovule develops into a fruit (Fig. 13.13).
When birds or animals eat the fruit, the seeds often get 
dropped far from the original plant—a helpful way for plants 
to spread. That’s how a banyan seed, dropped by a bird that ate 
a fruit and excreted the seed, might sprout in a crack in a wall 
after the rains. When seeds get water, they use stored nutrients 
to grow roots and shoots. Remember in Grade 6 you had studied 
the germination of seeds where you observed tiny shoots and the 
first leaves appear.
Sexual reproduction in animals
In animals, gametes are called sperm (male) and eggs 
(female). Fertilisation may take place in water, for example, 
male and female fish or frogs eject sperm and eggs, 
respectively, into the water where they combine to form 
the zygote. In these animals, the development of the zygote 
into an embryo also takes place in water (Fig. 13.14).
In birds and mammals, including humans, sperm are 
deposited inside the body of a female and fertilisation 
takes place when the sperm swim towards the egg 
produced by the female. After this step, birds and 
mammals follow different processes.
Zygote
Fertilisation
Egg cell
Sperm cell
Fig. 13.14: Formation of zygote
Ovule
Anther
Fig. 13.13: A flower
Chapter 13.indd 222 11-Sep-25 2:57:01 PM
Reprint 2026-27
