224
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Pollution adds to the problem. Air pollution 
from factories, vehicles, and burning fuels 
harms both people and the nature. It can 
cause breathing problems, damage crops, 
and lead to smog and acid rain (Fig. 13.15).
Climate change affects everything—from 
crop growth and water supply to wildlife 
habitats and human health. To protect life on 
Earth, we need to cut pollution, use cleaner 
energy, and make wiser choices. We have 
also learnt that life on Earth flourishes within 
a delicate balance supported by interdependent natural systems. 
However, this balance is increasingly threatened by human 
actions. For example, a little less or more of oxygen in air, or a 
little lower or higher temperature of the Earth, or a little less of 
ozone in the atmosphere, could endanger life on the Earth.
Countries around the world have made global agreements to protect 
the environment. The Montreal Protocol (1987) helped reduce 
harmful chemicals like Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), allowing the 
ozone layer to slowly recover. The Earth Summit (1992) led to 
international efforts on climate change and biodiversity. Later, 
the Kyoto Protocol (2005) and Paris Agreement (2015) committed 
countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Paris Agreement 
set a goal to limit global warming to below 1.5 °C, but as of 2025, the 
world is not on track to meet that goal. Much more action is needed 
to avoid any more adverse effects of climate change.
Ever heard of ...
Water and soil pollution are serious threats to life 
(Fig. 13.16). Factory, farm and plastic waste harm aquatic 
life and make water unsafe. Excess fertilisers and poor waste 
disposal pollute soil, reduce crop yield, and spread harmful
substances through the food chain. Protecting them requires 
better waste management and sustainable 
farming practices.
We have seen above that all the Earth system, 
such as hydrosphere, biosphere, atmosphere and 
geosphere are connected—so damage to one can 
affect the others. Protecting the climate means 
cutting down on greenhouse gases by using 
renewable energy like solar and wind, improving 
energy use, and choosing environmentally friendly 
ways to travel. At the same time, preserving Fig. 13.16: Water pollution
Fig. 13.15: Air pollution
Chapter 13.indd 224 6/28/2025 6:16:25 PM
Reprint 2026-27
