118 Exploration|Grade 9
The SI unit of work done is joule which is represented by J. The SI unit 
of force is the newton (N) and the SI unit of displacement is the metre (m). 
Thus, using Eq. (7.2), 1 joule can be defined as
1 J = 1 N × 1 m
That is, 1 joule of work is done on an object when a constant force
of 1 newton is applied to it and it is displaced by 1 metre in the direction
of the force. Since 1 N = 1 kg m s–2, note that 
1 J = 1 kg m s–2 × 1 m = 1 kg m2
 s–2
In the graph shown in Fig. 7.4, the force 
on an object is plotted on the Y-axis against 
the displacement in the direction of force on 
the X-axis. In this case, the work done on the 
object by the force is equal to the area of the 
shaded rectangle in the graph which is
10 N × 1 m = 10 J
Even when the force is not constant, work 
done can still be calculated by finding the area 
under the force-displacement graph between 
the initial and the final positions. 
7.1.1 When is work done equal to zero? 
From the definition of work done (Eq. 7.2), you can see that if the force 
acting on an object is zero, i.e., F = 0, then no work is done on the object. 
The work done on an object is also zero if there is no displacement of the 
object, i.e., s = 0, regardless of the force being applied on it. For example, 
if you apply a force on an object, such as a rigid wall (Fig. 7.5), there is no 
displacement in the wall and you have done no work on the wall.
This may seem odd because you feel tired. To apply a force, the muscles 
in your body repeatedly expand and contract, and use up the internal 
energy of your body. Thus, you may feel tired even though, in a scientific 
sense, you have not done any work on the object.
If a force acts in a direction perpendicular to the displacement of 
an object, the work done by that force is zero (Fig. 7.6) because 
there is no displacement in the direction of the force. For example, 
when a girl carries a box while walking, she applies an upward 
force to balance its weight, while the box moves horizontally. 
Since, the force and displacement are perpendicular to each other, 
no work is done by this force on the box. In higher grades, 
you will learn how to calculate the work done when force 
and displacement are at an angle to each other.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Force applied by 
the girl on the box
Fig. 7.6: Carrying a box
Displacement
Next
Level
Up
7.1.2 Positive and negative work done
The work done by a force on an object can either be positive or negative 
depending upon the relative directions of the force and the displacement. 
When the displacement is in the same direction as the applied force, the 
work done by the force on the object is said to be positive. For example, Force (N)
2
4
6
8
10
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Fig. 7.4: Force-displacement graph
Displacement (m)
0
Fig. 7.5: Pushing 
a wall
Force and 
displacement 
have both 
magnitude 
and direction. 
Work, however, 
does not have a 
direction. It can 
be described 
using a number 
with a positive 
or a negative 
sign. 
Ready to Go 
Beyond 
Chapter-07.indd 118 28-04-2026 15:56:25
