Work, Energy, and Simple Machines 119
when you push a wheelchair, the force applied by you on the wheelchair 
and its displacement are in the same direction (Fig. 7.7a). Thus, you do 
positive work on the wheelchair.
When the displacement is in the direction opposite to that of the force, 
then the work done by the force on the object is negative. For example, 
while stopping a ball, the goalkeeper applies a force in a direction opposite 
to the direction of motion of the football (Fig. 7.7b), and hence, opposite to 
the displacement. As a result, the goalkeeper does negative work on the ball.
Fig. 7.7: Examples of (a) positive, and (b) negative work done on object
(a)
Positive work 
done by the 
boy on the 
wheelchair
Displacement
Force
(b)
Negative work 
done by the 
goalkeeper on 
the ball
Displacement
Force
Example 7.1: While exercising, a girl lifts a dumbbell and slowly lowers it 
down. Identify when the girl does positive work on the dumbbell and when 
she does negative work on it.
Answer: The girl applies a force equal to the weight of dumbbell to lift 
it up. When she moves the dumbbell up, the force is in the direction of 
displacement, so she does positive work on it. When moving the dumbbell 
down, the force she applies to hold it is in a direction opposite to the 
displacement, so she does negative work on it.
Example 7.2: While saving a goal (Fig. 7.7b), a goalkeeper’s hand moved 
back by 15 cm as she stopped a ball while applying a force of 200 N. How 
much work did the goalkeeper do on the ball in stopping it?
Answer: The goalkeeper applied a force opposite to the motion of the ball, 
so she did negative work on the ball. The displacement should be taken as 
negative because the ball moves in a direction opposite to the direction of the
applied force.
Work done by the goalkeeper on the ball = force × displacement of ball 
in the direction of force
= 200 N × (– 0.15 m) = – 30 J
1. In the previous chapter, a weightlifter is shown holding a barbell steady 
in her hands (Fig. 6.8). Is she doing any work on the barbell while holding 
it steady?
2. Is the work done by friction on the stack of coins that travels on a rough 
surface (Fig. 6.13c) — positive, negative or zero?
Pause and Ponder
Note
The ball and 
the goalkeeper, 
both apply 
equal and 
opposite 
forces on each 
other. Both do 
work on each 
other. The ball 
does positive 
work on the 
goalkeeper, 
while 
goalkeeper 
does negative 
work on the 
ball.
Chapter-07.indd 119 28-04-2026 15:56:26
