120 Exploration|Grade 9
7.2 The Work-Energy Theorem
We have seen that when a force is applied and an object is displaced, work 
is done on it. Does this cause the object to gain capacity to do further work?
Consider some everyday life examples. A fielder throws a cricket ball 
towards the wicket (Fig. 7.8a). The moving ball hits the wicket, making it fall 
(Fig. 7.8b). Similarly, a flowerpot raised to a height can damage an object 
below it if it falls (Fig. 7.8c). So, in each case, the ball or the pot has acquired 
a capacity to do some work. An object having the capacity to do work is said 
to possess energy. But how did the ball or the pot get their energy? The ball 
gained energy from the work done by the fielder in throwing it. The pot 
gained energy from the work done in raising it to a height.
When positive work is done on an object, it gains energy. Subsequently, 
the object can use that energy to apply a force on another object and cause 
it to move, thereby transferring energy. For example, when the ball hits 
the wickets, it transfers its energy to the wickets, making them move. Thus, 
work done on an object and its energy are closely related to each other.
Work done on an object appears as a change in its energy. The relation 
between the work done on an object and the change in its energy is called 
the work-energy theorem, which can be stated as
work done on an object = change in its energy (7.3)
This theorem also holds for a system of objects or even when the forces 
applied on an object are not constant. This theorem can help us solve 
problems which we could not have done easily otherwise.
The SI unit of energy is the same as the SI unit of work, the joule (J).
Doing mechanical work is one way of transferring energy from one object to 
another. But that is not the only way! Energy can also be transferred as heat. 
When two objects at different temperatures come in contact, energy flows 
from the hotter one to the colder one. Energy can also move without direct 
contact. For example, the Sun’s energy reaches the Earth through radiation. 
Energy is transferred in electric circuits, as well as via sound waves, and 
even in nuclear reactions that power the Sun.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Example 7.3: In a game of carrom, a player played the shot shown in Fig. 7.9 
to pocket the black coin. Identify who does work, and the changes in energy 
that occur at each collision.
Answer: The moving striker collides with the white coin, which in turn 
collides with the black coin. The moving striker applies force in the 
direction of displacement of the white coin. The striker, 
thus, does positive work on the white coin, increasing 
its energy. By Newton’s third law, the white coin applies 
an opposite force and does negative work on the striker, 
decreasing its energy. Similarly, the white coin does 
positive work on the black coin increasing its energy, 
while the black coin does negative work on the white 
coin, decreasing its energy.
(b)
(c)
(a)
Fig. 7.8: (a) Throwing 
a cricket ball, (b) ball 
hitting the wickets, and 
(c) a flower pot falling 
from a height
Fig. 7.9: A carrom shot
Meet a Scientist
The SI 
unit of 
work and 
energy, 
joule, 
is named after 
the scientist, 
James Prescott 
Joule. He studied 
how mechanical 
energy and 
thermal energy 
are related, and 
can be converted 
from one to the 
other. This helped 
develop a unified 
way to understand 
energy. 
Chapter-07.indd 120 28-04-2026 15:56:26
