Work, Energy, and Simple Machines 121
3. When you pedal a bicycle on a flat road, your muscles supply energy. In 
what forms does this muscular energy appear as you ride?
Pause and Ponder
7.3 Forms of Energy
As we have seen, energy is the capacity to do work. The 
examples that we have discussed till now correspond to the 
mechanical energy. But energy can exist in many other forms 
as shown in Fig. 7.10. It is possible to change energy from one 
form to another. For example, electrical energy is converted 
into light energy in a bulb, and into thermal energy 
of the water in an electric water heater. The chemical 
energy in the food we eat powers our muscles and 
gets converted into mechanical energy. Similarly, 
a ringing bell converts mechanical energy into 
sound energy.
Among these, we will now look more closely at mechanical 
energy, since it is directly connected to the forces and motions 
you studied earlier.
7.4 Mechanical Energy
Mechanical energy is the energy that an object possesses due 
to its motion or position. Let us try to quantify mechanical 
energy by using the concept of work.
7.4.1 Kinetic energy
The energy possessed by an object due to its motion is called 
kinetic energy. All moving objects possess kinetic energy, 
such as a moving bicycle or a rolling ball. 
How much is the energy possessed by an object by virtue of 
its motion? It is common to define an object that does not move 
to have zero kinetic energy. Consider an object that starts from 
rest and acquires a certain velocity under the influence of a 
force F (Fig. 7.11). Then by the work-energy theorem, the work 
done by the force will equal to the energy gained by the object, 
which is the kinetic energy of the object in this case.
Initial velocity = 0
Initial Kinetic energy = 0
F
Work done by force
W = F×s
Final velocity = v
Final Kinetic energy = K
Displacement along the force = s
Fig. 7.11: Calculating change in kinetic energy using the work-energy theorem
Let us find a mathematical expression for the kinetic energy. For that, 
we will first find a general expression for work done by a force on an object 
of mass m, starting not from rest but from an initial velocity u. Let v be its 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 3
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 3
Mechanical energy
Energy due to motion 
or position of objects
Energy related to 
position or motion 
of charges
Thermal energy
Energy that 
makes things 
warm or hot
Light energy
Energy that 
allows us to 
see
Sound energy
Energy of 
vibrations of air or 
other molecules
Energy stored in 
the nuclei of atoms
Energy stored in fuels and food 
in the form of chemical bonds 
between atoms
Nuclear energy
Chemical energy
Electrical energy
Fig. 7.10: Different forms of energy
Chapter-07.indd 121 28-04-2026 15:56:27
