124 Exploration|Grade 9
Similarly, when you apply a force and stretch or compress a spring 
(Fig. 7.14a), you do work on the spring to change or deform its shape. In 
turn, the spring stores energy or gains a capacity to do work while it is in a 
deformed state (Fig. 7.14b). While held in this state, the energy of the spring 
is due to its configuration or shape. When the spring is released, it comes 
back to its original shape. In the process, the spring transfers its stored 
energy to the kinetic energy of the object in contact (Fig. 7.14c).
You need to apply an external force to overcome the internal forces in 
the spring to deform it. Once you remove this external force, the internal 
forces undo the deformation, and in the process, it can carry out work. 
Thus, internal forces allow energy to be stored in a deformed object.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Energy can be stored not only by deforming an object, but also by 
changing the arrangement of objects in a system. You have learnt that like 
poles of the magnets repel each other, while unlike poles attract each other. 
You must have experienced that separating unlike poles of two magnets from 
each other requires applying a force. When unlike poles are separated from 
each other and released (Fig. 7.15a), they move towards each other and gain 
kinetic energy. In fact, a small pea kept in between the two strong magnets, 
could even be crushed by their kinetic energy. This shows that the system of 
two magnets when separated from each other, can store energy due to their 
relative positions.
Fig. 7.15: A system of two (a) magnets, and (b) electric charges
Magnetic Force Electrostatic Force
+ + - -
(a)
N S
(b)
In the same way, a system of electric charges separated by a distance 
(Fig. 7.15b) also possesses the stored energy which can do work when 
released. 
Now, consider a ball lying on the surface of the Earth. The ball 
and the Earth together form a system. You have learnt earlier 
that the Earth and ball attract each other. A force is required to 
do work against the gravitational force to lift the ball to some height. But 
once the ball is lifted to a height and the force is removed, the ball and the 
Earth rush towards each other, and attain kinetic energy in the process 
(Fig. 7.16). So, the system of ball and the Earth when separated from each 
other, store energy due to their relative positions.
More generally, whenever a system of objects interacts through forces, 
such as gravitational, electric or magnetic forces, the system can store 
energy due to the relative positions of the objects.
The energy stored by an object as a result of its deformation or in a system 
of objects due to their relative positions is called the potential energy.
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Fig. 7.14: Spring (a) in 
its original shape,
(b) in compressed shape, 
and (c) moving back to 
its original shape 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 7.16: Earth ball 
system
Gravitational 
Force
Ground
Chapter-07.indd 124 28-04-2026 15:56:28
