Work, Energy, and Simple Machines 125
Gravitational Potential Energy
Among the various types of possible ways in which objects can have potential 
energy, we will look at the simplest case of the gravitational potential 
energy of Earth-ball system. The Earth is much more massive than the ball, 
and thus, it hardly moves towards the ball, as discussed in Example 6.8 of 
Chapter 6, How Forces Affect Motion. Therefore, the stored energy of the 
Earth-ball system is often, simply referred to as the gravitational potential 
energy of the ball. Let us carry out an activity to learn more about the 
potential energy of the ball due to the gravitational force between the ball 
and the Earth. Henceforth, in this chapter, potential energy usually refers 
to the gravitational potential energy.
Activity 7.1: Let us investigate
1. Take a heavy ball and a large container filled with loose 
sand. 
2. Raise the ball over the sand bed to a height of about 1 m 
and drop it (Fig. 7.17). Is a depression created in the sand? 
Why does the ball create a depression?
3. Now, raise the ball to the height of 2 m and release it at a slightly 
different position over the sand bed such that the depressions do not 
overlap. Repeat this step one more time. Compare the depths of the 
depressions. Is there any difference? In which case is the depression 
deepest and in which case the shallowest?
You find that the depression is deepest when the ball is dropped from 
the greatest height. Raising a ball to a greater height from the surface of 
the Earth requires more work. Thus, the ball possesses more energy at 
greater height. When the ball is released from a greater height, this energy 
creates a deeper depression. Thus, the greater the height of the ball above 
the Earth’s surface, the greater is its potential energy.
We can arrive at an expression for the potential energy of an object 
by using the work-energy theorem. Consider an object of mass m lying 
on the ground (Fig. 7.18). We can define the potential energy to be zero 
in this configuration. To raise the object gradually from the surface of 
the Earth to a height h , we need to apply a force equal to the force mg
between the Earth and the object. The work done W by this applied force 
on the object is
W = force × displacement 
W = mg × h = mgh (7.7)
According to the work-energy theorem (Eq. 7.3), the work done on the 
object appears as a change in its potential energy. Thus, the potential energy 
U of the object at a height h is given by
 U = mgh (7.8)
The unit of potential energy is the joule (J), which is the same as the 
unit of work done or that of kinetic energy.
Fig. 7.17: Depressions created by a ball 
in sand dropped from different heights 
Fig. 7.18: Raising an 
object to a height
Ground
F = mg
h
Chapter-07.indd 125 28-04-2026 15:56:29
