Work, Energy, and Simple Machines 127
As the object falls down with time t, its potential energy decreases while 
its kinetic energy increases. Comparing Eq. (7.9) and Eq. (7.10), you find that 
at time t, the increase in the kinetic energy is equal to 
1 22
2
mg t , which is also 
equal to the decrease in the potential energy, 
1 22
2
mg t . This shows that the 
lost potential energy of the object is converted into kinetic energy during 
motion, while its mechanical energy remains constant and equal to mgh.
As an object moves due to the gravitational force, its mechanical energy 
remains the same, i.e., the mechanical energy of the object is conserved 
if no other external forces act on it. This is called the conservation of 
mechanical energy. 
Let us conduct an activity to understand this. Do you remember 
experimenting with a simple pendulum earlier? Let us use that 
simple pendulum again to experiment further.
Activity 7.2: Let us experiment 
1. Set up a simple pendulum as you have 
learnt in Grade 7.
2. Paste a white sheet of paper on a 
wall behind the pendulum. Draw a 
horizontal line above the position 
of the bob when it is not oscillating
(Fig. 7.20).
3. Take the bob to one side to a point P, 
which is at the level of the horizontal 
line and let it go. Observe it at the 
extreme points of the first couple 
of oscillations. Does the bob almost 
reach the level of the horizontal line?
At point P, the pendulum bob has the potential energy equal to mgh, 
where h is the height from the bottom-most point. At point Q, the potential 
energy is zero, but the pendulum has kinetic energy. Finally at point R, on 
the other side of the pendulum where it stops, the kinetic energy is zero 
but the pendulum bob regains its potential energy. The pendulum bob 
reaches almost the same height it started with. This demonstrates that the 
mechanical energy of the bob remains constant. However, in real life, the 
pendulum slows down and eventually stops because of energy loss due to 
friction at the support and air resistance. 
The conservation of mechanical energy can often be useful in solving 
several real-life problems.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Mechanical energy is just one part of a bigger picture. In nature, energy can 
appear in many different forms. Scientists have discovered that the total 
energy of an object or system of objects which is not acted upon by any 
external forces, stays constant.
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 8
Fig. 7.20: A pendulum
No kinetic energy
Only potential energy
No kinetic energy
Only potential energy
Only kinetic energy
No potential energy
Q
R P h
Chapter-07.indd 127 28-04-2026 15:56:29
