Work, Energy, and Simple Machines 133
7.6.3 Lever
Activity 7.4: Let us investigate 
1. Take a 30 cm long scale, a pencil, 2 – 3 erasers and a 
stapler (or a similar object).
2. Place the scale over the pencil such that the pencil is 
closer to one end of the scale as shown in Fig. 7.31. On 
the end of the scale closer to the pencil, place the stapler. 
3. On the other end of the scale, place one eraser. Does the 
stapler lift up? If not, add one more eraser. 
You may have noticed that a much heavier object (like 
a stapler) could be lifted by a much lighter eraser. This was 
made possible by using a scale as a simple machine called 
a lever. A lever is a rigid bar (such as your scale) that can 
rotate about a fixed point (such as the point of contact of the 
scale with the pencil).
In everyday life, levers are often used to lift heavy objects. 
A lever has three main parts (Fig. 7.32): (i) Fulcrum: a fixed 
point about which the lever rotates, (ii) Load: the force to be 
overcome, and (iii) Effort: the force applied. The distance 
of the load from the fulcrum is called the load arm, and the 
distance of the effort from the fulcrum is called the effort arm.
By applying a small force at one end of the lever, a larger 
force can be applied on the object on the other end of the 
lever. How is this possible? 
The end of the lever on which the smaller force (F1
) is 
applied, moves a larger distance (d1
), while the other end 
which applies a larger force (F2
) to lift a heavier object, 
moves a smaller distance (d2
). The work done on one end of 
the lever is transferred to the other end. Thus, using Eq. (7.1)
F1
 × d1
 = F2
 × d2 (7.14)
Thus, by increasing the effort arm, the lever applies a 
larger force F2
 to the load compared to the applied effort F1
.
Let us do an activity with a beam balance which is an 
example of a lever.
Activity 7.5: Let us experiment
1. Take a long scale (50 cm or larger), a piece of string, two 
paper cups (to act as pans), adhesive tape or a piece of 
thread, and identical coins (to act as weights).
2. Tie the string tightly around the scale at its midpoint. 
This string will act as the fulcrum. Hang the scale from 
this string using a stand or hook, so that it can swing 
freely. This scale will now act as a beam (Fig. 7.33).
3. Fix paper cups to both ends of the beam using thread. 
These cups act as the pans of a balance. Check whether 
the beam is levelled. If it is tilted, adjust the hanging 
points of the pans until both sides balance equally. 
Fig. 7.33: Balancing cups hung on 
a scale
Fig. 7.31: Lifting a heavier object with 
lighter object
Fig. 7.32: A lever used to lift a 
heavy rock
Fulcrum
Effort arm
Effort
Load arm
Load
F1
F2
d1
d2
Note
A lever reduces the force 
required to perform a 
task but not the total 
work done.
Chapter-07.indd 133 28-04-2026 15:56:34
