Work, Energy, and Simple Machines 139
The Journey Beyond
y Remove both the ends from a pen so that the refill 
can slide freely through the barrel (Fig. 7.40). Fix the 
pen cap to the side of the barrel and attach a rubber 
band to the clip of the cap. Connect the free end of the 
rubber band to the refill using a safety pin. Stretch and 
release the rubber band. The refill shoots out, showing 
the conversion of elastic potential energy into kinetic 
energy. Repeat with different amounts of stretch, and 
observe how the distance travelled changes. Is there 
a relationship between the stretch and the distance 
travelled?
y Construct one or more simple machines, or a 
combination of them (lever, pulley, and inclined plane) 
using easily available materials, such as cardboard, 
wooden strips or rulers, pencils or bolts (to act as a 
fulcrum), thread or rope, small pulleys (or two bottle 
caps stuck together), and paper cups to hold small 
weights. Be imaginative in your design. Use your model 
to lift or move a small load, measure the effort and the 
load, and calculate the mechanical advantage.
y Computer simulations can help in visualising physical quantities 
that are difficult to observe directly. The PhET simulations (https://
phet.colorado.edu) provide interactive models, such as Energy Skate 
Park, Energy Forms and Changes, Pendulum Lab, and Masses and 
Springs. Use these to explore how different forms of energy change as
parameters, such as mass, height, and friction are varied.
(a)
(b)
(a)
Fig. 7.40
The Quest Continues ...
For long, scientists have known that the Universe is expanding, and surprisingly this expansion is 
accelerating. To explain this, scientists have proposed a new and rather mysterious form of energy 
called dark energy. There is no way to exchange dark energy with other forms of energy. Scientists 
try to study the effects of dark energy since it may govern the fate of the Universe, billions of years 
into the future.
Chapter-07.indd 139 28-04-2026 15:56:38
