253 Earth as a System: Energy, Matter, and Life
y Cryosphere: Solid form of water, such as ice and snow (like the 
Himalayan glaciers, snow in Ladakh and polar ice caps).
y Atmosphere: The air surrounding the Earth that we breathe (cleaner 
air in the mountains and forests).
y Biosphere: All living organisms and their habitats (including 
mangroves, forests, farms, ocean plankton and coral reefs).
We will explore how energy and matter move, interact across the 
Earth’s spheres, and how a change in one affects others. Understanding 
these processes has been an important part of the continuing journey of 
the exploration of science. Natural processes, such as heating by solar 
radiation, movement of air and water, and nutrient cycling connect 
these spheres in a delicate balance. Let us understand this by conducting 
Activity 13.1 and explore how different spheres on the Earth continuously 
interact with each other.
Activity 13.1: Let us explore
1. Observe the features of the Earth as shown 
in Fig. 13.1. Identify and circle one example 
representing each of the geosphere, hydrosphere, 
cryosphere, atmosphere, and biosphere.
2. How does snow (cryosphere) eventually become 
part of the lake (hydrosphere)?
3. If there is less snowfall during winters for a few 
years, how would this affect the lake’s level and 
the grass available for the sheep?
4. Discuss with your classmates and write down 
how all the spheres are interconnected, and how 
a disturbance in one can lead to changes in others.
From Activity 13.1, we can infer that a disturbance in one sphere can 
lead to changes in others. For example, less snowfall in winters may lead 
to less water in the lake in summers, resulting in less water to support the 
growth of grass. Similarly, on a large scale, warmer Arabian Sea water lead 
to more evaporation from the sea. This in turn, causes fluctuations in the 
southwest monsoon, which results in variability in rainfall, bringing floods 
to some regions of India while leaving others in drought. This disrupts the 
hydrosphere. At the same time, the rise in atmospheric temperature could 
eventually accelerate the melting of glaciers and polar ice in the cryosphere, 
which may lead to the flooding of low-lying regions, and in the long run, it 
can raise sea levels that may threaten coastal cities. This could disturb the 
ecosystems within the biosphere by causing a habitat loss.
Does the solar radiation heat the Earth’s surface evenly? Let us explore 
how solar radiation varies from the equator to the poles, the oceans to the 
mountains, and drives many of Earth’s natural processes, such as wind, 
ocean current, water cycle, etc. 
13.1 Uneven Heating of the Earth
Solar radiation is the main source of energy on the Earth. It reaches the 
Earth as electromagnetic (EM) waves that travel through a vacuum at 
Fig. 13.1: Some features of the Earth’s surface
Chapter-13.indd 253 04-04-2026 16:23:26
