254 Exploration|Grade 9
the speed of light (unlike EM waves, sound waves, which you studied 
in Chapter 10, Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications, are 
mechanical waves and require a medium to travel). The speed of light in 
vacuum is 3 × 108
 ms–1. EM waves cover a wide range of frequencies, from 
high frequency or short wavelength radiation (gamma rays and X-rays) to 
low frequency or long wavelength radiation (infrared and radio waves). 
The high frequency EM waves, such as gamma rays and X-rays have very 
high energy and can be harmful for life on Earth.
The entire range of electromagnetic 
radiation called electromagnetic 
spectrum is shown in Fig. 13.2. However, 
the solar radiation reaching Earth is 
concentrated mainly in the ultraviolet (UV), 
visible and infrared (IR) range — about 
99 per cent of the Sun’s energy falls within 
these wavelengths. These three regions 
of the spectrum shape the Earth’s climate 
and support life. Gamma rays and X-rays 
are mostly filtered by the Earth’s upper 
atmosphere, while microwaves and 
radio waves carry very little energy to 
significantly warm the Earth. 
Short wavelength UV radiation is mostly absorbed by the ozone 
layer in the upper atmosphere, protecting life and contributing to some 
atmospheric heating. Visible light from the Sun reaches the Earth’s surface 
and provides energy for photosynthesis, which is the primary source of 
food for most organisms. It also partly warms the land and water. Infrared 
radiation warms the Earth’s surface, which then re-radiates this heat back 
into the atmosphere. A portion of this outgoing heat is trapped by the 
greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide (CO2
), methane (CH4
) and water 
vapour, keeping the Earth warm enough to support life. 
The UV rays lie in the wavelength range of 100 nm to 400 nm [1 nanometre (nm) 
= 10–9 m] and have a much higher energy than the visible light. Prolonged exposure to 
these rays can damage the eyes and skin, and increase the risk of cancer. Therefore, 
people should use UV protective glasses and sunscreen if they are likely to be exposed 
to UV rays. UV rays are also useful in killing germs in water purifiers and help power 
fluorescent lights.
Ready to Go Beyond
The amount of the Sun’s radiation that reaches the Earth’s surface is 
called insolation. It is responsible for warming the Earth’s surface and its 
atmosphere. The average amount of solar energy received per unit time 
per unit area that is perpendicular to the Sun’s rays at the top of the Earth’s 
atmosphere is called the solar constant. Its value is approximately 1.4 
kilowatts per square metre (1.4 kWm–2), or about 1400 joules per second 
per square metre (1400 J s–1m–2). It represents the Sun’s energy available 
on the Earth before any absorption, scattering or reflection occurs in the 
atmosphere. 
Fig. 13.2: Electromagnetic spectrum
Gamma rays X-rays UV IR Microwaves Radio waves
higher frequency or
shorter wavelength
lower frequency or 
longer wavelength
Visible
Chapter-13.indd 254 03-Apr-26 8:00:42 PM
