255 Earth as a System: Energy, Matter, and Life
The solar constant is important because it helps scientists understand 
the Earth’s energy balance, climate and weather patterns. However, some 
of this energy is absorbed and scattered by gases, clouds and dust particles 
in the atmosphere before reaching the surface of the Earth. As a result, the 
maximum insolation reaching the Earth’s surface is lower than the solar 
constant and is about 1 kWm–2 under clear sky conditions. India, due to 
its geographical location in the tropical and sub-tropical regions, receives 
abundant sunlight throughout the year. This makes solar insolation highly 
significant as it drives the southwest monsoon, which influences India’s 
climate and agriculture. It also offers immense potential for harnessing 
solar energy as a renewable and sustainable source of energy.
Anna Mani, India’s pioneering atmospheric scientist, mapped solar 
insolation across India in the 1950s. Along with S. Rangarajan, she later 
published Solar Radiation Over India in 1982, creating the country’s 
first insolation atlas. Her pioneering measurements showed India’s 
vast solar energy potential. Today, this is being realised through the 
large-scale deployment of solar power across the country. India is 
laying the foundation for a resilient, sustainable and solar-powered 
energy future that sets global benchmarks.
Bridging Science and Society
Fig. 13.3: Solar Radiation 
Over India by Anna Mani
and S. Rangarajan
Example 13.1: How much solar energy will be received by a 1 m2
 area in 
one hour, if the insolation on the surface of the Earth were 1 kWm–2 ?
Answer: E = Intensity × area × time
E = 1 × 1000 J s–1 m–2 × 1 m2
 × 3600 s
E = 3600000 J = 3.6 × 106
 J
(This amount of energy is approximately equal to the energy needed to 
melt 5 kg of ice and heat the water obtained to 100 °C. It is also equal to one 
unit of electricity used in a household, as shown on an electricity bill).
Think as a Scientist
An interesting estimation problem that helps us 
to appreciate the enormous amount of energy 
that we get from the Sun is to estimate how much 
of the Earth’s surface would be needed to be 
covered with solar panels to supply all the electric 
power that our country uses today (Fig. 13.4). To 
make this estimate, you can find these numbers 
on the internet, assume some insolation on the 
Earth’s surface and consider that some fraction 
of this energy is converted into electricity. You 
will probably find that even a fraction of the area 
of the Thar desert, if covered with solar panels, 
could supply India’s electricity needs. Fig. 13.4: Solar panel in the desert
Chapter-13.indd 255 29-04-2026 14:47:21
