256 Exploration|Grade 9
How does the Sun’s radiation interact with the Earth’s surface and 
atmosphere, and warm the Earth? We will discuss more about it in the 
following sections.
13.1.1 Interaction of solar radiation on 
the Earth’s surface
Different materials absorb and heat up differently 
under sunlight. You have already learnt 
how land heats up faster than water. 
There may be some variation due to 
the material forming the land and the colour of 
the soil. Dark surfaces absorb more sunlight, while 
light coloured surfaces reflect more and remain 
comparatively cooler. For example, dark coloured 
roads heat up more quickly, while light coloured 
surfaces remain comparatively cooler. You have 
also learnt why dark coloured clothes feel hotter 
than white ones in summer.
The fraction of solar radiation reflected by 
a surface is called its albedo (the word ‘albedo’ 
comes from Latin which means whiteness). High 
albedo surfaces stay cool because they reflect 
more light, while low albedo ones heat up more 
quickly as they reflect less and absorb more light 
(Fig. 13.5). Let us try to find out the albedo of some 
of the common objects we come across in our 
daily lives by conducting Activity 13.2. 
Activity 13.2: Let us find out 
Complete Table 13.1 using information from authentic sources like websites 
and books.
Table 13.1: Reflection of solar radiation by surfaces of materials
S. No. Materials Albedo 
1. Snow 0.80 – 0.90
2. Ice 0.50 – 0.70
3. Crushed rock 0.25 – 0.30
4. Light coloured soil
5. Black soil
6. Ocean water
From Table 13.1, you must have seen that snow and ice have high 
albedo, meaning they reflect a large proportion of the incoming solar 
radiation. This makes polar regions very cold. On the other hand, surfaces 
like black soil and ocean water have lower albedo as they absorb more 
solar radiation, and hence, they are relatively warmer.
Partly reflected by 
atmosphere and 
clouds
Partly absorbed by 
the Earth’s surface
Partly reflected by 
Earth’s surface 
Partly absorbed by 
atmosphere and clouds
Sun
(Source of energy)
Fig. 13.5: Solar radiation and warming of 
the Earth
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 7
Note
Ensure that you 
do not share 
any personal 
information 
while using the 
internet.
Chapter-13.indd 256 03-Apr-26 8:00:48 PM
