257 Earth as a System: Energy, Matter, and Life
You have also learnt in the earlier grades that all objects radiate heat. 
We feel hot inside a concrete house at night especially during hot summer, 
this is due to the heat re-radiated by the concrete during the night. However, 
traditional houses built with thick mud and wooden walls offer cool 
conditions even in hot summer due to less re-radiation. 
Threads of Curiosity
Urban Heat Island Effect
Cities are warmer than their surrounding rural areas, 
especially during summer and at night. Compared to 
rural areas, cities have more built-up areas, including 
buildings of steel, concrete, brick, and roads made up of 
concrete and asphalt. All these materials absorb solar 
radiation and retain heat. The re-radiated heat from 
these materials warms cities more than the surrounding 
rural areas. This increases energy demand for air 
conditioning further stressing the urban ecosystems. 
Rural areas and forests have more vegetation, and stay 
cool through shade and plant transpiration. The urban 
heat island effect shows how human land use can alter 
the local climate (Fig. 13.6). Fig. 13.6: Urban heat island effect in a city
The amount of radiation received by a particular region on the Earth’s 
surface also depends on its latitude. The uneven heating due to the latitude 
of a place is important as it determines the atmospheric conditions of that 
place.
13.1.2 Latitude and Earth’s shape
You have already learnt in earlier grades that the Earth is spherical. As a 
result, the Sun’s rays strike different latitudes at different angles on the 
Earth. The Sun’s radiation falling on the equatorial region is concentrated 
over a smaller area, where it is spread over a larger area in the polar 
region. This is why, equatorial regions remain relatively warm throughout 
the year, whereas polar regions experience much colder conditions. This 
uneven heating creates temperature differences between the equator and 
the poles.
You have also learnt how the Earth’s spherical shape and the tilt of the 
Earth’s axis of rotation give rise to seasons, and the changing length of 
daytime during one revolution of the Earth around the Sun. Thus, solar 
radiation is not evenly distributed across the globe. This uneven heating 
of the Earth’s surface across the globe drives global winds and ocean 
currents.
13.1.3 Role of the atmosphere
The air surrounding the Earth is called atmosphere. It is held in place by 
the force of Earth’s gravity. It consists mainly of nitrogen (78%) and oxygen 
(21%) along with small amounts of argon, carbon dioxide, water vapour, 
and other gases.
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 7
Grade 7
Exploring Society: 
India and Beyond
Part 1
Chapter 3
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 12
Chapter-13.indd 257 03-Apr-26 8:00:50 PM
