259 Earth as a System: Energy, Matter, and Life
The atmosphere is continuously modified by natural processes, 
influencing weather, climate and energy balance. When solar radiation 
and cosmic rays interact with the atmosphere, they influence weather and 
climate, and affect communication systems. Thus, atmosphere makes the 
Earth a unique planet.
Why is the ozone layer so important?
The ozone layer is vital to life on the Earth because it acts as a protective shield, absorbing harmful 
UV radiation from the Sun. When ozone molecules are destroyed faster than they are naturally 
formed, the layer becomes thinner and less effective. In the late 20th century, human-made 
chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), used in refrigerators and aerosols, caused severe 
ozone loss over Antarctica, which came to be known as the ozone hole. Increased UV radiation on 
the Earth can harm the living organisms and the ecosystems. A global agreement known as the 
Montreal Protocol reduced the use of CFCs and the ozone layer is now slowly recovering, showing 
the power of international scientific cooperation.
Threads of Curiosity
13.2 Uneven Heating Causes Wind and Ocean 
Currents
You have learnt that wind is the movement of air from a region of high 
pressure to a region of low pressure. These pressure differences are mainly 
caused by the uneven heating of the Earth’s surface by the Sun. Uneven 
heating of land and water is also responsible for phenomena, such as 
land and sea breezes, which you have studied earlier. The same basic idea 
helps us understand the formation of winds and ocean currents on vastly 
different scales.
13.2.1 Local winds
Uneven heating of the Earth’s surface also produces local 
winds, such as valley and mountain breezes. In mountainous 
regions, the slopes and the valley floor do not heat up and cool 
down at the same rate. During the day, the mountain slopes 
facing the Sun are heated more rapidly than the valley floor. 
As a result, the air over the slopes becomes warm and rises, 
creating a low pressure region. Cooler air from the valley 
moves up the slopes to replace the rising warm air. This flow 
of air is called a valley breeze (Fig. 13.8a). 
After sunset, the situation reverses. The mountain slopes 
lose heat faster and become cooler, while the valley floor 
remains relatively warmer. The air over the slopes becomes 
cooler and denser, and flows down into the valley. This is 
known as a mountain breeze (Fig. 13.8b). Such daily changes 
in the direction of the wind are commonly experienced in 
hilly regions like Shimla, Dehradun, and other Himalayan 
valleys. These local winds influence the weather conditions, 
agriculture and daily life in mountainous regions. They help 
regulate temperature, moisture conditions and support soil 
and crop health. Thus, uneven heating of the Earth’s surface 
sets up winds and forms an important part of the Earth’s 
atmospheric circulation.
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 6
Fig. 13.8 (a): Valley breeze
Warm air 
risingValley breeze
Valley breeze
Fig. 13.8 (b): Mountain breeze
Cold air 
sinking
Mountain breeze
Mountain breeze
Chapter-13.indd 259 03-Apr-26 8:00:55 PM
