261 Earth as a System: Energy, Matter, and Life
temperatures. While warm equatorial waters 
travel over the surface toward the poles, colder 
and denser waters slowly flow back towards the 
equator through deeper ocean levels. Ocean water 
has different salinities depending on the location. 
Water with lower salinity, being less dense, tends 
to remain near the surface, while higher salinity, 
denser water sinks and moves at deeper levels 
in the ocean. The Earth’s rotation deflects these 
moving water masses, forming large circular 
patterns called gyres. These rotate clockwise in the 
Northern Hemisphere and counter clockwise in 
the Southern Hemisphere (Fig. 13.10a). Continents 
further modify these paths by blocking and 
redirecting currents.
Ocean currents play a major role in regulating 
the Earth’s climate and supporting life. By 
transporting heat from the equator towards the 
poles, they reduce temperature differences across 
the planet. For example, the warm ocean current — 
the North Atlantic Drift (Fig. 13.10b), an extension 
of the Gulf Stream (a strong ocean current carrying 
warm water from the southern part of the North 
American east coast across the Atlantic Ocean) — 
flows toward the northwestern coast of Europe 
and keeps many ports ice-free during winter, even 
at high latitudes. This moderating influence on 
climate also supports human activities, such as 
trade and commerce. Ocean currents also support 
a massive ecosystem by transporting nutrients. 
2. How does the cool mountain breeze benefit agriculture activity, particularly the crops and soil?
3. What happens to the warm surface of water from the equator as it travels toward the poles? 
What impact does this movement have on the area?
Pause and Ponder
Scientists at the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology 
(IITM), Pune, run advanced computer models that couple 
the energy flows we discussed in this chapter, between 
atmosphere, oceans, land and ice to simulate the Indian 
monsoon. These models use data from satellites, buoys in 
the Indian Ocean, and even stations in Antarctica to improve 
seasonal forecasts and to study how global warming may 
change monsoon rainfall patterns across India.
India’s Scientific Contributions
Fig. 13.11: Indian Institute of Tropical 
Meteorology (IITM), Pune
Fig. 13.10 (a): Global surface ocean 
currents showing circulation like gyres
EUROPE
GREENLAND
NORTH
AMERICA
SOUTH
AMERICA
AFRICA
Fig. 13.10 (b): Gulf Stream brings warm water 
from the equator
Chapter-13.indd 261 03-Apr-26 8:00:59 PM
