262 Exploration|Grade 9
13.3 Biogeochemical Cycles
Living organisms constantly exchange matter and energy with the air, 
water, soil and rocks around them. This continuous interaction between 
the non-living (abiotic) and living (biotic) components of the Earth results 
in the transfer of matter and energy across various spheres of the Earth, 
as discussed earlier. This process ensures that essential nutrients, such 
as carbon, nitrogen and oxygen are recycled, and remain available to 
support life on the Earth. This cyclic movement of matter and energy 
between the abiotic and biotic components is called the biogeochemical 
cycle. There is a dynamic relationship between different ecosystems. 
This interconnectedness helps ecosystems recover from disturbances or 
degradation and maintain environmental balance.
We will examine the water, carbon, nitrogen and oxygen cycles. We 
will try to understand why their balance matters, and explore how they 
interconnect across spheres and respond to human impacts.
13.3.1 Water cycle
You have studied the water cycle and learnt terms like evaporation, 
transpiration, condensation, precipitation, infiltration and groundwater. 
The water cycle is summarised in Fig. 13.12. In this cycle, water evaporates 
from water bodies, such as rivers, lakes, oceans, etc., and condenses to form 
clouds. It returns as precipitation in the form of rain, hail or snow to the 
surface and finally flows back to the ocean. Some of the water seeps through 
soil and rocks beneath the Earth’s surface. Water dissolves minerals from 
soil and rocks. It also supports all terrestrial organisms and transports 
these nutrients to oceans, and support marine life.
Climate change is now affecting the water 
cycle. For example, a warmer atmosphere 
holds more moisture, causing heavier rains 
in some areas (like intensified monsoons) 
and droughts elsewhere. Melting glaciers add 
more water to rivers, raising sea levels in the 
long run and threatening coastal cities, such 
as Mumbai and Chennai. Sudden bursts of 
intense rainfall result in more run off that 
erodes soil and less infiltration reduces the 
recharge of groundwater, which in turn, 
makes sustaining agriculture difficult, 
especially during dry months. In this way, the 
water cycle links the cryosphere (glaciers), 
hydrosphere (rivers and oceans), atmosphere (moisture), geosphere (soil 
erosion and decreased infiltration), and biosphere (crops and fisheries), all of 
which are affected by global warming.
13.3.2 Carbon cycle
Carbon forms the backbone of life. Every protein, carbohydrate, fat and 
DNA molecule contains carbon. It circulates continuously between the 
atmosphere (CO2
 gas), biosphere (plants and animals), geosphere (carbonate 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 7
Fig. 13.12: Water cycle
Clouds
Run off
Evaporation
Condensation
Ground water
Transpiration
Precipitation
Chapter-13.indd 262 03-Apr-26 8:01:00 PM
