264 Exploration|Grade 9
13.3.3 Nitrogen cycle
Nitrogen is an essential element for the synthesis of proteins and nucleic 
acids in all living organisms. The largest reservoir of nitrogen is in our 
atmosphere. However, nitrogen gas (N2
) is rather non-reactive, and cannot 
be directly used by plants and animals. It must first be converted to 
soluble compounds that living beings can absorb. The overall movement 
of nitrogen between air, soil, water and organisms is called the nitrogen 
cycle (Fig. 13.15). The nitrogen cycle 
contains several steps — nitrogen fixation, 
assimilation, ammonification, nitrification
and denitrification.
Nitrogen-fixing bacteria, such as 
Rhizobium in the root nodules of legumes 
and Azotobacter in the soil, convert 
atmospheric N2
 into ammonia (NH3). 
Nitrifying bacteria like Nitrosomonas 
convert ammonia into nitrite (NO–
2), while 
Nitrobacter convert nitrite into nitrate (NO–
3).
This process is known as nitrification. 
Plants assimilate these nitrogen compounds 
from the soil, whereas animals obtain 
nitrogen by consuming plants or other 
animals. When plants and animals die or 
produce waste, decomposers like bacteria 
and fungi break the organic matter, 
returning nitrogen compounds like ammonia to the soil. This process is 
known as ammonification. Denitrifying bacteria, such as Pseudomonas
convert some nitrates back into nitrogen gas. This process is known 
as denitrification. This completes the cycle and maintains a balance 
of nitrogen in ecosystems. Lightning also contributes to the fixation of 
nitrogen oxides.
During lightning strikes, a tiny amount of atmospheric nitrogen is fixed 
to produce nitrogen oxides. Today most of the nitrogen is fixed artificially 
via the Haber-Bosch process (early 1900s) of making ammonia from 
atmospheric nitrogen, which produces most of the fertilisers used today. 
This ‘Bread from Air’ revolutionised agriculture, enabling India’s Green 
Revolution and feeding billions. More than half the nitrogen atoms in the 
human body come from the Haber-Bosch process. However, this reaction 
is energy intensive (uses ~ 1 – 2% of global energy), and the overuse of 
fertilisers has degraded soil and water.
Ready to Go Beyond
13.3.4 Oxygen cycle
Oxygen is one of the Earth’s most abundant elements. About 21% of the 
atmosphere consist of free oxygen gas (O2
). It is an essential component 
of most biological molecules like carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids 
and fats. Oxygen also exists in combined forms — in the Earth’s crust as 
Fig. 13.15: Nitrogen cycle
Atmospheric N2
Decomposers
Ammonia
Nitrate Nitrite
Assimilation
Ammonification
Denitrification
Nitrification
Nitrification Nitrogen fixation
Chapter-13.indd 264 04-04-2026 11:26:39
