265 Earth as a System: Energy, Matter, and Life
Fig. 13.17: Eutrophication (algal bloom)
photosynthesis 
stopped, what 
would happen 
on the Earth?
What if ...
metal oxides and minerals, and in the air as 
carbon dioxide. While discussing the oxygen 
cycle, we focus on processes that regulate the 
oxygen level in the atmosphere (Fig. 13.16). 
Organisms like plants and animals use oxygen 
for respiration, and releases CO2
. Combustion 
of fuels uses oxygen and releases CO2
. Plants 
restore oxygen through photosynthesis using 
sunlight, water and CO2
 to form glucose and 
release O2
. This balance between consumption 
(respiration and combustion) and production 
(photosynthesis) circulates oxygen between 
the atmosphere, land, oceans and living 
organisms, sustaining life across all spheres of 
the Earth.
5. What would happen to plants and animals on Earth if the biogeochemical cycles were disrupted 
and stopped? Explain by giving a few examples.
Pause and Ponder
13.4 Human Impact on Earth’s Processes
You have learnt about the impact of climate change earlier, in which we 
examined the crises our planet Earth is facing. Rising CO2 levels from the 
use of fossil fuels leads to extreme weather and biodiversity loss. Here, 
we will examine how human actions disrupt the biogeochemical cycles 
across the Earth’s spheres. Excess atmospheric CO2 increases ocean 
absorption, making sea water more acidic. This could threaten tiny 
plankton and coral reefs, disrupting the marine ecosystems. However, 
warmer ocean water reduces the ocean’s capacity to absorb CO2 as an 
effective carbon sink.
Burning of fossil fuels and deforestation saturate natural carbon sinks 
like forests and oceans. Over the past 50 years, there has been a significant 
change in the Earth’s natural systems. In India, fossil fuels still generate a 
significant part of our electricity, contributing harmful emissions, although 
the rapid growth of solar energy offers hope. The excess CO2
 intensifies 
greenhouse warming, disrupting the carbon cycle.
The overuse of fertilisers in agriculture adds excessive 
nitrogen via nitrates to rivers and lakes, causing widespread 
growth of algae (algal blooms) that deplete oxygen and kill 
fish. This process is called eutrophication (Fig. 13.17), which 
threatens water bodies and coastal fisheries. Deforestation 
also creates multiple effects across air, water, land and 
living organisms. Clearing forests results in decreased 
photosynthesis and reduced transpiration, which can lead to 
decline in the local rainfall. It also alters surface albedo. Without 
tree roots to hold the soil together, soil erosion could increase. 
Over time, habitats could be destroyed, leading to a decline in 
biodiversity as many species lose their natural homes.
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 13
Fig. 13.16: Oxygen cycle
Industrial
A
nimal O2
 in the 
atmosphere Plant respiration
Photosynthesis
respiration
combustion
CO2
CO2
Chapter-13.indd 265 03-Apr-26 8:01:07 PM
