266 Exploration|Grade 9
Vehicular emissions react with sunlight to form 
ground level smog. This also leads to the formation of 
ground level ozone, which is harmful for health (remember 
that ozone in the stratosphere blocks UV radiation and is 
protective of life). These pollutants make city air unhealthy.
While human impact affects all Earth’s spheres, a 
combination of local actions and global cooperation can 
help restore the Earth’s natural systems. For example, the 
Montreal Protocol has started the process of recovery of 
the ozone layer through global cooperation. However, the 
Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement in which countries 
were supposed to reduce their CO2
 emissions have been 
less successful. 
Conserving energy and energy resources, switching to 
renewable energy resources (like solar and wind), planting 
trees, saving water and practising sustainable farming 
can help restore the balance. India has planted billions of 
trees, expanded energy from solar and renewable sources 
significantly, and also promoted sustainable farming 
practices. Individuals can also contribute by saving resources 
(water, food and energy). This can be done by reducing waste, 
reusing and recycling materials. Together, all these efforts 
will help maintain the environmental balance on Earth.
6. Discuss how human activities increase the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. 
What would you do as an individual to reduce the emission of greenhouse gas?
Pause and Ponder
y The electromagnetic radiation received from the Sun is the primary 
source of energy on the Earth. 
y Most weather processes like evaporation, condensation and 
precipitation occur in the troposphere.
y The shape of the Earth, latitude and tilt of the Earth’s axis are primarily 
responsible for variations in insolation, and hence, for the uneven 
heating of the Earth’s surface.
y Uneven heating of the Earth’s surface is responsible for the generation 
of winds and ocean currents.
y Matter and energy are continuously cycled between the living (biotic) 
and the non-living (abiotic) systems.
y Atmospheric oxygen is used in combustion, respiration and oxide 
formation, and is restored mainly through photosynthesis.
y On the Earth, water, carbon, nitrogen and oxygen continuously cycle 
between the atmosphere, oceans, land and living organisms. 
y Biogeochemical cycles make nutrients available to living organisms, 
sustain life, regulate climate and balance ecosystems.
At a Glance
Mission LiFE (Lifestyle for 
Environment), an India-led 
global initiative introduced at the 
United Nations Climate Change 
Conference in 2021, encourages 
people to adopt mindful, 
eco-friendly lifestyles. Traditional 
practices and ancient texts in 
India have long recognised 
that the Earth functions as an 
interconnected system. The 
Earth works through the flow of 
energy and the cycling of matter 
across spheres. Unsustainable 
consumption disturbs this 
balance. By promoting simple 
habits, such as saving energy and 
conserving resources, Mission 
LiFE highlights how the actions of 
individuals and communities can 
help build a sustainable future.
Threads of Curiosity
Chapter-13.indd 266 03-Apr-26 8:01:09 PM
