267 Earth as a System: Energy, Matter, and Life
Revise, Reflect, Refine
1. Choose the most appropriate option to describe the role of 
biogeochemical cycles in an ecosystem.
(i) To provide food directly to all organisms.
(ii) To recycle essential nutrients between biotic and abiotic 
components.
(iii) To create new elements for use by living things.
(iv) To remove pollutants and toxins from the organism.
2. Which of the following is primarily responsible for warming of the 
Earth?
(i) Solar radiation is immediately absorbed by carbon dioxide, which 
then releases it as heat.
(ii) The atmosphere’s tiny particles absorb incoming solar radiation, 
which directly heats the Earth.
(iii) The Earth’s surface absorbs solar radiation, which is then 
re-radiated and trapped by greenhouse gases.
(iv) The Earth’s environment is heated only by the solar radiation 
reflected by the clouds.
3. Explain how climate change affects the water cycle. Illustrate with 
examples.
4. Describe how albedo affects the Earth’s surface temperature and its 
climate.
5. How are mountain and valley breezes formed? Suppose there are 
two mountains, one covered with grass and another covered with 
barren rocks; would the temperature of the two mountain breezes be 
different? If so, how?
6. You have witnessed weather phenomena, such as winds, storms, 
rainfall, etc. Which atmospheric layer is mainly responsible for such 
phenomena and what is the primary reason for its occurrence?
7. Explain the processes involved in the nitrogen cycle. How would life 
on Earth be affected if nitrogen were not cycled?
8. What are the impacts of deforestation on the Earth’s oxygen and 
carbon cycles? What are the other consequences of deforestation?
9. Explain with suitable diagram the path that carbon takes to go back 
to the atmosphere. You may start from plants using CO2 from the 
atmosphere.
10. Why is an excess of CO2
 in the atmosphere considered undesirable 
even though it is required by plants?
11. How is heat lost from the surface of the Earth? What is its significance?
12. If the Earth were a flat disc instead of a sphere, how would the patterns 
of solar radiation and temperature be different?
Chapter-13.indd 267 03-Apr-26 8:01:11 PM
