268 Exploration|Grade 9
The Journey Beyond
y Consider two hypothetical Earth-sized planets that have an atmosphere. 
Assume that one planet is entirely covered by oceans and the other is 
entirely by land. Knowing that the Sun heats the equator more than the 
poles, how would the wind patterns on these planets compare with the 
wind systems we observe on Earth, with its combination of land and 
sea?
y Choose any one meal you ate recently (it could be anything, for example, 
roti and dal, rice and sambar, idli and chutney, and so on). For each 
main item in the meal, find out and explain: (i) how the carbon in it 
originally came from carbon dioxide in the air through photosynthesis, 
and (ii) how the nitrogen in it likely came from the atmosphere into the 
soil (for example, by bacteria or through the Haber-Bosch process and 
fertilisers) and then into the plant. Further, list other human activities 
involved in producing or cooking this meal that add extra carbon dioxide 
or nitrogen to the environment.
y Using data from the India Meteorological Department (IMD, 
https://mausam.imd.gov.in/) or newspaper records, find the average 
monsoon rainfall (June – September, or the local season) for your city 
or district for 5 years during two decades, such as the 1980s and 2020s. 
Note any trend you may find (increasing or decreasing, or the total 
number of days) with heavy rain (>50 mm). How can this be connected 
to the warmer Arabian Sea temperatures or changes in land use (forests 
to farms to cities) as discussed in the chapter?
13. Suppose there is a rise in atmospheric temperature on Earth. How 
would this affect the cryosphere, hydrosphere and biosphere?
14. Explain how the Earth’s atmosphere helps in maintaining a suitable 
temperature for life to survive on the Earth.
15. Describe the interrelationship between different spheres of the Earth. 
Illustrate with example how these spheres function in a delicate 
balance.
The Quest Continues ...
New tools are allowing scientists to observe the planet in real time and uncover 
hidden connections between climate, ecosystems, and human activity. What 
new discoveries will these tools reveal about the changing Earth, and how will 
they improve our understanding of global warming and climate change?
Chapter-13.indd 268 03-Apr-26 8:01:17 PM
