Beyond Earth
233
Growing up, Yangdol and Dorjay have been hearing 
interesting stories about stars from their elders. They have 
heard how some particular stars in the clear skies helped 
the caravans passing through Nubra in finding direction in 
the ancient days. They wonder how far away and how big 
the stars are. They also enjoy trying to find some patterns 
among the stars that remind them of familiar objects. Have 
you ever looked at the stars in the night sky and tried to 
connect them with imaginary lines, just like dots and lines 
in a drawing? 
Activity 12.1: Let us draw
‹ Fig. 12.2 shows bright stars in one part of the night sky. 
‹ Look at it carefully and try to imagine a pattern formed 
by a group of stars.
‹ Draw lines to connect the stars and make the pattern.
‹ Think of an animal or an object that is similar to the 
pattern drawn by you. Write its name near your pattern.
12.1 Stars and Constellations
At night, when we look up at the sky, we see 
many stars. Some stars are bright and others 
are dim. Stars shine with their own light. 
Some groups of stars appear to form 
patterns which are like shapes of familiar 
things. Long ago, when watching stars in 
the night sky was a favourite pastime of our 
ancestors, they identified these star patterns with animals, 
things or characters in stories. Many cultures had names 
for patterns based on their own stories. These imaginary 
shapes helped them in recognising stars in the sky. 
Recognising stars and their patterns was a useful skill 
for navigation in the olden times. Before the arrival of 
modern technology or even before the invention of the 
magnetic compass, it helped people, particularly sailors 
and travellers, in finding directions at sea or on land. It is 
still used in emergencies as a backup method. 
In earlier times, groups of stars forming patterns were 
called constellations. Currently, the term constellation 
refers to defined regions of the sky that often include these 
patterns of stars. However, as the patterns of stars are often 
the most noticeable feature, the term constellation is still 
commonly used for these groups of stars.
Do we find patterns 
among the stars just 
for fun or is there 
some use of these 
patterns?
Since different cultures denoted the constellation 
boundaries in different ways, an internationally agreed 
set of constellation boundaries were defined by the 
International Astronomical Union (IAU) in the early 
twentieth century. 88 constellations were officially 
listed, thus, dividing the entire sky into 88 regions. 
These regions of sky are now defined as constellations.
More to 
know!
Some constellations are shown in Fig. 12.3. The stars 
are joined by imaginary lines, drawn for easy identification. 
The constellation Orion is often represented as a hunter. 
There are three stars in the middle, which represent the belt 
of the hunter. Some people imagine that the hunter Orion, 
followed by his dog (constellation Canis Major), is battling 
a bull (constellation Taurus). Canis Major contains a star 
Chapter 12.indd 233 16-09-2025 03:53:53
Reprint 2026-27
