Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6
236
12.2 Night Sky Watching
If it is a clear cloudless night, a large number of stars may be 
visible in the sky. If you stay in a big city, you may find that 
the sky is rarely clear and only a few stars are seen in the 
night sky. This is due to light pollution, smoke and dust. The 
presence of excessive artificial light at night time is referred 
to as light pollution. In villages or areas where there is less 
light pollution, a larger number of stars can be seen. Also, 
your house may be surrounded by tall buildings and trees, 
which may block your view. The night sky is best viewed 
from open dark areas. 
Light pollution is growing sharply globally. This is reducing our 
ability to enjoy and study objects in the night sky. Some 
dark sky reserves and parks have been established 
around the world. Light pollution in the reserves is 
controlled to preserve dark skies for research. There 
are organisations which are working to educate people Do you about reducing light pollution.
know?
Not all stars and constellations are visible from 
all places on Earth and on all nights in a year. 
For example, the Pole Star is not visible from 
the southern hemisphere of Earth. To identify 
a star or a constellation, you need to know 
how a particular constellation looks like 
and where to look for it in the night sky. To 
get familiar with the pattern of a constellation 
you may use images such as Fig. 12.3 and Fig. 12.4. 
To find out when and in which portion of the sky a star or 
a constellation will be visible from your location, you may 
take the help of sky mapping apps that can be downloaded 
on a mobile phone, or other online resources.
Sky Map is a very handy app for identification 
of stars, constellations and planets from mobile 
phones. Stellarium is another such app. The 
computer version of Stellarium is free for 
download and has many features.
More to 
know!
Can we try to find 
any constellation 
or star of our 
choice on any 
night from our 
location?
Chapter 12.indd 236 08-09-2025 3.38.33 PM
Reprint 2026-27
