10 Exploration|Grade 9
different objective lenses (e.g., 10X, 40X) to achieve 
better magnification and resolution under visible 
light. Explore different parts of a microscope 
(Fig. 2.2) in your school laboratory and 
use it to observe fine structures of various 
materials. Under the microscope, you 
will see a magnified image of an object. Can you 
estimate its actual size?
Activity 2.1: Let us estimate the size of a cell 
1. Take a transparent ruler with millimetre (mm) 
markings.
2. Place the ruler on the stage of microscope, focus 
on it using the adjustment knob and observe the 
diameter of the circular field of view through 
the eyepiece and measure it in mm. 
3. Convert the diameter from mm to micrometre 
(µm). Suppose the diameter of the visible field
is 5 mm, meaning 5 × 1000 = 5000 µm.
4. Remove the ruler and place an onion peel slide 
on the stage of the microscope.
5. Focus on the slide and count the number of cells 
present along the diameter of the field of view in 
one straight line.
6. Estimate the real size of the cell using the 
formula:
Unit conversion:
1 millimetre (mm) = 1000 micrometre (µm)
Estimated size of the onion peel cell = 
Diameter of the visible field in micrometre
Number of cells along the diameter
Fig. 2.2: Structure of a light microscope
Eye piece
Body tube
Objective 
lens
Stage
Mirror
Course adjustment 
knob
Fine adjustment 
knob
Handle
Base
Suppose, 25 cells are seen along the diameter. In that case, the size of one 
onion cell would be 5000 µm/25 = 200 µm.
If the estimated size of an onion peel cell is 200 µm, how much does a 
light microscope magnify this cell? The total magnification of a microscope 
depends on its magnifying power of the eyepiece and the objective lens. If 
both the eyepiece and the objective lens have the magnifying power of 10X, 
then the total magnification will be 100X. This means that a cell with an 
estimated size of 200 µm will appear 100 times larger.
Thus, a microscope allows us to see very small structures clearly and is an 
essential tool for studying the cell structure. Over the years, scientists have 
improved the microscope by improving its three main features — resolution 
(measure of clarity), contrast (the difference in brightness between various 
Ready to Go Beyond 
Fig. 2.3: An electron microscope
Apart from light microscopes, 
scientists also use powerful electron 
microscopes that reveal the fine details 
of a cell structure. These instruments 
use a beam of electrons instead of light 
to produce highly magnified images, 
allowing us to see cell structure at 
the nanometre scale with remarkable 
clarity (a nanometre is one-billionth of 
a metre).
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Chapter-02.indd 10 04-04-2026 15:04:28
