Cell: The Building Block of Life 11
parts of an object), and magnification. These improvements 
have turned microscope into a powerful tool for studying 
cells.
You can see a picture of the lower surface of Colocasia leaf 
observed under a Scanning Electron Microscope (Fig. 2.4).
2.2 Structure of a Cell
You have learnt that cells are organised into specialised 
tissues and organs, and collectively perform specific 
function. For these cells to function as units, they must 
be able to interact with one another and with their surroundings. These 
interactions occur at the cell boundary, where substances move between 
the cells and their external environment. Even single-celled organisms 
exchange materials and respond to their environment through cell 
membrane. 
2.2.1 Cell membrane — The universal feature of a cell
The cell membrane is a thin boundary that surrounds a cell and protects 
its contents. It defines the individuality of a cell and is also called the plasma 
membrane. The cell membrane is selectively permeable, which means it 
allows some substances to pass through it while blocking others. You have 
learnt how oxygen and carbon dioxide move across the membranes of 
alveoli in the lungs. How does the structure of the cell membrane in the 
cells of alveoli control the movement of substances across it?
Activity 2.2: Let us experiment
1. With the help of a kitchen knife, 
carefully cut a potato into two pieces 
of roughly equal size (Fig. 2.5). 
2. Measure and record the initial weight 
of both the pieces using a weighing 
balance. 
3. Put one piece of the potato in Beaker 
A with plain water.
4. Put the other piece of the potato in 
Beaker B with 20 per cent salt or sugar 
solution.
5. Leave them undisturbed for about 
an hour or until you notice a visible 
change in the size of the pieces.
6. Measure and record the final weight 
of each piece.
7. Calculate the difference between the 
initial and their final weights.
What do you observe? You may observe 
that —
Beaker A — The potato piece swells.
Beaker B — The potato piece shrinks.
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Fig. 2.5: Experimental set-up, and initial 
and final states of potato pieces in (a) plain 
water, and (b) 20 per cent salt solution
Initial (a) (b)
Beaker A Beaker B
Experimental set-up
Final (a) (b)
Fig. 2.4: Electron micrograph of lower 
surface of a Colocasia leaf showing stomata
Stomata
Chapter-02.indd 11 03-Apr-26 7:27:54 PM
