12 Exploration|Grade 9
What do you infer? What do you expect in terms of changes in their 
weight? The weight of the potato piece in Beaker A has increased, while 
the weight of the potato piece in Beaker B has decreased. This happens 
because the cell membrane allows water to move in and out of the cell 
but not the sugar or salt molecules. Water moves from an area with more 
water and less solute (dilute solution) to an area with less water and more 
solute (concentrated solution) until the concentrations in the two areas 
become equal. This movement of water through a selectively permeable 
membrane is called osmosis. You have learnt in Activities 7.8 
(dye spreading in water) and 7.9 (fragrance spreading in air) in 
Grade 8 that particles of matter intermix, due to a difference in 
their concentrations, also called a concentration gradient. Diffusion is the 
net movement of particles from a higher to a lower concentration (which 
occurs even without a membrane). Osmosis is the diffusion of water across 
a selectively permeable membrane. In plants, water from the soil enters 
root cells by this process of osmosis.
a cell is kept in salt or sugar solutions of different concentrations?
Solute concentration of extracellular 
medium = Solute concentration of intracellular 
medium — Isotonic solution
Isotonic
Solute concentration of extracellular 
medium < Solute concentration of intracellular 
medium — Hypotonic solution Hypotonic
Solute concentration of extracellular 
medium > Solute concentration of intracellular 
medium — Hypertonic solution Hypertonic
Fig. 2.6: Effect of solutions of different concentrations on a cell
solution
solution
solution
What if ...
Structurally, the cell membrane is 
extremely thin, about 7 to 10 nanometres 
(nm) thick (1 nanometre = 0.000001 mm). It 
is made up of lipids (fats) and proteins. The 
fluid-mosaic model explains its structure 
(Fig. 2.7) : 
y The membrane has a lipid bilayer (two 
layers of special fat molecules with 
water attracting heads outwards and 
water repelling tails inwards) with 
proteins embedded in them.
y The molecules can move sideways, flip and rotate within the membrane. 
Hence, it is fluid.
y Proteins in the membrane act like gatekeepers in helping substances 
pass through.
Fig. 2.7: Structure of a cell membrane
Lipid 
bilayer
Various types of 
proteins
mung bean 
seeds are 
kept in a 
concentrated 
solution after 
soaking in 
water for 12 
hours? What 
will happen 
to them?
What if ...
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 7
Chapter-02.indd 12 03-Apr-26 7:27:55 PM
