Cell: The Building Block of Life 13
y Since the molecules are arranged like tiles in a mosaic, it is called the 
‘mosaic’ model.
All living cells communicate with their surroundings and their 
neighbouring cells through the cell membrane. However, cells of plant, 
fungi, and bacteria have an additional layer around the cell membrane, 
called the cell wall. What do you think is the necessity of the cell wall in 
these cells?
Activity 2.3: Let us investigate
1. Prepare temporary slides of a thin peel of an onion leaf or a Rhoeo
(Cradle lily) leaf and mount it with safranin using cover slip to observe 
plant cells under a microscope. 
2. Similarly, prepare a temporary slide of cheek cells by gently scraping 
the inner side of your cheek with a cotton swab or the blunt end of a 
toothpick. 
3. Spread the cheek cells on a clean glass slide. 
4. Add a drop of water followed by a few drops of methylene blue stain and 
carefully place a coverslip.
5. Observe both the slides under a microscope.
What do you observe? Onion peel cells (Fig. 2.8a) or Rhoeo leaf peel cells are 
box-shaped and regularly arranged, whereas cheek cells are irregularly 
arranged (Fig. 2.8b). Why do you think this difference exists?
Prepare two slides of a Rhoeo leaf peel and human cheek cells again, and 
put 20 per cent sugar solution on them. Observe them under a microscope 
after half an hour. What do you observe? You must have observed that 
the boundaries of the plant cells remain the same but their inner content 
shrinks, and the space between the inner and outer boundaries increases 
(Fig. 2.9a and b). You may observe that the cheek cells, on the other hand, 
have shrunk considerably.
2.2.2 Cell wall — The outer covering of cells
In general, plants cannot move from place to place, so they need a rigid 
structure to withstand environmental stresses like wind and rain. 
Therefore, plant cells have an additional covering outside the cell membrane 
called a cell wall. The cell wall also helps leaves and flowers remain firm, 
and maintain their shapes and help plants stay upright. Although rigid the 
cell wall is permeable, which means water and some dissolved minerals 
can pass through it. Along with the selective permeability of the cell 
membrane, the permeability of the cell wall helps plant roots absorb water 
and nutrients from the soil. 
When we place a Rhoeo leaf or an onion peel in a concentrated sugar 
solution the plant cells lose water due to osmosis. However, the cells do not 
shrink in size because their rigid cell wall maintains their shape. The inner 
content of a cell shrinks as the cell membrane pulls away from the cell wall. 
This shows that the cell wall helps plant cells remain firm in their original 
shape.
Animal cells, such as cheek cells do not have a cell wall. Therefore, 
when placed in a concentrated sugar solution, they lose water and shrink. 
Fig. 2.8: (a) The 
onion peel cells, and 
(b) human cheek cells
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.9: Cradle lily leaf 
peel cells (a) in water, and 
(b) in 20 per cent sugar 
solution
(a) 
(b) 
Chapter-02.indd 13 04-04-2026 15:04:33
