14 Exploration|Grade 9
Without a rigid cell wall, animal cells can change shape easily. This cellular 
flexibility supports the overall movement and functioning of animal tissues. 
The plant cell wall is primarily made of cellulose, a type of carbohydrate 
formed by many glucose units linked together. Cellulose in our diet acts 
as roughage, helping in digestion. Some microorganisms, like fungi and 
bacteria also have a cell wall to provide protection and structural support 
to their cells.
1. What argument would you give for the necessity of a cell wall in plants 
usually fixed in one place versus in animals usually moving from one 
place to the other?
2. What consequences would you predict for a plant cell if its cell wall were 
to become as flexible as a cell membrane?
3. Why is it important to cut the two potato pieces in roughly equal size and 
measure their initial weight before placing them in different liquids? 
Pause and Ponder
2.3 The Cell Interior — A Coordinated Working System 
You have learnt that most cells have three basic parts:
y a selectively permeable membrane called the plasma 
membrane,
y a semi-fluid, jelly-like substance called the cytoplasm, and
y a prominent nucleus.
In addition to the nucleus, the cytoplasm contains several sub-cellular 
components called organelles, along with other substances present in it, 
most of which are only visible with an electron microscope.
Activity 2.4: Let us study
Cell wall Mitochondria
Golgi body
Endoplasmic 
reticulum
Ribosome Ribosome
Ribosome
Cytoplasm Cytoplasm
Nucleolus
Chloroplast
Cell membrane
Vacuole
Vacuole
Nucleoid
Appendage for 
locomotion
(a) (b) (c)
Nucleus
Fig. 2.10: (a) A typical bacterial cell, (b) a typical plant cell, and (c) a typical animal cell
Lysosome
1. Study the given diagrams of a bacterial cell, a plant cell, and an animal 
cell (Fig. 2.10a, b and c). 
2. Observe the different structures present in each of them. 
3. Record your observations in Table 2.1. 
A bacterial cell lacks a well-defined nucleus and membrane-bound 
organelles (organelles surrounded by their own membranes). Such cells 
are called prokaryotic cells (pro means primitive and karyon means 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 9
(Genetic material)
Chapter-02.indd 14 03-Apr-26 7:27:56 PM
