16 Exploration|Grade 9
2.3.1 Why do eukaryotic cells need these organelles?
Eukaryotic cells carry out various life processes in different cell organelles 
independently at the same time.
Cell organelles help in building new materials, removing waste, and 
providing energy to the cell. They work together to perform all functions of 
a cell. In other words, a cell is like a tiny living factory, with each of its part 
doing a specific job. 
Let us explore these specialised structures present inside a cell.
Nucleus — House of coded 
instructions
The nucleus has a double-layered 
covering called the nuclear membrane, 
which has pores that allow the transfer 
of material between the nucleus and 
the cytoplasm. The nucleolus is the 
dense round body in the nucleus, where 
synthesis of ribosomal subunits take 
place. These subunits then exit the 
nucleus to cytoplasm where one large 
and one small subunits assemble to 
form ribosome (Fig. 2.11).
The nucleus contains chromosomes, which are visible as rod-shaped 
structures only when the cell is about to divide. Chromosomes contain 
information for inheritance of characters from parents to the next 
generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. 
Chromosomes are composed of DNA and specific proteins. DNA molecules 
contain the genetic information. The functional segments of DNA are called 
genes. In a non-dividing cell, this DNA is present as part of chromatin 
material. Chromatin material is visible as an entangled mass of thread-like 
structures. Whenever the cell is about to divide, the chromatin material 
gets organised into chromosomes (Fig. 2.12).
Threads of Curiosity
Some cells are specialised to perform specific functions. For example, mature Red 
Blood Cells (RBCs) in humans do not have a nucleus (enucleate). The absence of 
a nucleus provides more space for haemoglobin, allowing it to transport a larger 
amount of oxygen to all cells of the body. Since they lack a nucleus, they cannot 
repair or divide themselves. As a result, their lifespan is short and they survive 
approximately for 120 days. Do you know any other cells without nucleus?
Prokaryotic cells do not have a well-defined nucleus. Their DNA is 
present as a single circular molecule associated with specific proteins. The 
region containing this genetic material is called the nucleoid.
Fig. 2.12: From cell 
to DNA
Nucleus
Chromatin
Chromosome
DNA
Fig. 2.11: Structure of a nucleus
Nuclear pore
Double-layered 
nuclear membrane
Chromatin
Nucleolus
Nucleus
Chapter-02.indd 16 03-Apr-26 7:27:57 PM
