Cell: The Building Block of Life 17
Ribosomes — The protein factories 
These are tiny structures may be present 
either freely in the cytoplasm or attached to the 
endoplasmic reticulum. Ribosomes are the sites of 
protein synthesis. 
Endoplasmic Reticulum 
(ER) — Manufacturing factory
The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) is a large organelle 
that spreads like a network within the cytoplasm of the 
cell. The ER is continuous with the outer membrane 
of nuclear envelop. The ER plays a key role in the 
synthesis and transport of proteins, fats (lipids), and 
some hormones in some of the specialised cell. The 
structure of the ER in a cell varies depending on its 
function. There are two types of ER:
y Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum (RER): It looks 
rough under an electron microscope because 
it has ribosomes attached to its surface, and is 
mainly involved in protein synthesis and protein 
secretion (for example, in gland cells, such as 
pancreatic cells).
y Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum (SER): It does 
not have ribosomes on its surface, and therefore, 
looks smooth. It is involved in the synthesis, and 
storage of fats and hormones (Fig. 2.13).
Golgi apparatus — The packaging and 
shipping centres
If you carefully look at the diagram of a cell 
(Fig. 2.10b and c), you will notice stacks of flattened, 
sac-like structures. Together, these stacks form the 
Golgi apparatus (Fig. 2.13). It is functionally linked 
to the ER, the cell membrane and the other cell 
organelles. The Golgi apparatus acts like the cell’s 
post office. It modifies, sorts, and packages proteins 
and/or lipids into vesicles for transport, secretion, 
or lysosome formation. 
Lysosomes — The clean-up system
Cells produce waste materials and damaged, 
worn-out organelles during their activities. 
How does the cell prevent these wastes from 
accumulating inside it?
Lysosomes are single membrane-bound sacs 
filled with enzymes, which can break down 
unwanted proteins, carbohydrates, fats, and even 
Meet a Scientist
The Golgi 
apparatus was 
first observed in 
1898 by an Italian 
scientist, Camillo 
Golgi, in the nerve 
cells of a barn 
owl. Using special 
staining techniques, he observed 
a thread-like network. Early 
microscopes could not resolve it 
clearly, therefore, many doubted 
its existence. However, electron 
microscope observations 
confirmed it decades later.
When the structure was 
clearly seen and confirmed, it 
was named the ‘Golgi apparatus’ 
in his honour.
Fig. 2.13: Endoplasmic reticulum and 
Golgi apparatus — pathway for protein 
processing and secretion
Ribosome
Rough 
endoplasmic 
reticulum
Smooth 
endoplasmic 
reticulumGolgi apparatus
Vesicles
Plasma 
membrane
Chapter-02.indd 17 03-Apr-26 7:27:58 PM
