18 Exploration|Grade 9
damaged parts of the cell, keeping it clean and healthy. The products 
formed by the breakdown are released into the cytoplasm, where they may 
be reused in other cellular processes.
Threads of Curiosity
Human sperm cells contain lysosomal enzymes. When a sperm meets an egg, these 
enzymes help break down the outer layer of the egg, allowing fertilisation to take 
place. You will learn about the human sperm cells later in Chapter 11.
Mitochondria — The powerhouse of the 
cell
Mitochondria are often called the ‘powerhouses of 
the cell’ because they supply the energy needed for 
most cellular activities. Each mitochondrion (Fig. 
2.14) is surrounded by two membranes :
y The outer membrane is smooth and 
porous.
y The inner membrane is folded into finger-like 
projections called cristae, which increase 
the surface area for chemical reactions and 
facilitate energy production. 
In mitochondria, the glucose and other 
molecules are broken down to release energy 
during a process called cellular respiration. You have already studied about 
it. The energy released is stored in the form of a molecule called Adenosine 
Triphosphate (ATP), which acts as the energy currency and is used for most 
of the cellular activities. 
Plastids — Centre for food synthesis in the plant cells 
and beyond
You have learnt that mitochondria provide energy to the cell that comes 
from food. Animals can obtain food from their surroundings, however, 
plants synthesise food in the presence of sunlight. But where do plants 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 9
synthesise their food and obtain energy for cellular 
activities? Plants use special organelles called 
plastids for food synthesis and storage.
As you have learnt, plants prepare their 
food by the process of photosynthesis in the 
presence of sunlight. A green pigment called 
chlorophyll, which is present in the chloroplast 
(a type of plastid) absorbs sunlight. Chloroplasts 
are double-membrane-bound organelles, like 
mitochondria. Inside the chloroplast (Fig. 2.15) there 
is a semi-fluid substance called the stroma. Within 
the stroma are disc-shaped membrane structures 
that contain chlorophyll. Light energy is absorbed 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Fig. 2.14: Structure of a mitochondrion
Outer 
membrane
Inner 
membrane
Intermembrane 
space
Ribosomes
DNA
Cristae
Fig. 2.15: Structure of a chloroplast 
Stroma
Ribosomes
Inner 
membrane
DNA
Outer 
membrane
Chapter-02.indd 18 03-Apr-26 7:27:58 PM
