Cell: The Building Block of Life 19
by them during photosynthesis. The sugars synthesised in this process are 
stored in stroma, along with the starch granules.
Mitochondria and plastids have some features that are similar to certain 
bacteria. For example, they both have their own DNA and ribosomes, and 
thus, they can make some of their own proteins. These characteristics 
suggest that both mitochondria and plastids share an evolutionary history 
with these single-celled organisms.
Are there any other plastids in plant cells that contain any pigments 
other than the green pigments?
How do flowers, fruits, and vegetables acquire varied colours? 
In flower petals and fruits, plastids contain pigments other than chlorophyll. 
These plastids are called chromoplasts (in Greek, chroma means colour). 
Their pigments (may be yellow, orange or red) are the source of bright colours 
in such flowers and fruits. Such bright colours help in attracting pollinators 
for pollination and fruit-eating animals that help in seed dispersal. 
Some plastids lack pigments and are thus, colourless. These are called 
leucoplasts (in Greek, leukos means white). Leucoplasts store food material, 
such as starch, oils or proteins and are classified based on the type of food 
they store. For example, some leucoplasts in potato and taro (Colocasia)
cells store starch. 
Vacuoles — The organelles for storage and support
Plastids, such as chloroplasts help plants produce food and temporarily 
store it. Other plastids, such as leucoplasts help in storing food. But where 
are water, minerals, and waste materials stored in the cell? Why do plants 
look wilted when they do not get enough water? 
In a mature plant cell, there is usually one large central vacuole
surrounded by a single selectively permeable membrane. The vacuole is 
filled with a watery fluid called cell sap. The vacuole stores water, minerals, 
sugars and waste material. By storing large amounts of water, the vacuole 
helps maintain pressure inside the cell, which keeps a plant cell firm. When 
a plant does not get enough water, the vacuole loses water, the cells become 
less firm, and the plant gets wilted.
In animal cells, vacuoles are sometimes present. Although they are not 
as large as plant vacuoles, they help in the temporary storage of materials.
4. Do white flowers contain any pigment? Give reasons.
5. Draw a well-labelled schematic diagram of a plant or an animal cell using 
these clues —
(i) Nucleus appears as a dark and round body inside the cell.
(ii) ER spreads like a network of extended nuclear envelope.
(iii) Mitochondria and chloroplasts are rod shaped.
You may refer to Fig. 2.10.
Pause and Ponder
Chapter-02.indd 19 03-Apr-26 7:27:59 PM
