20 Exploration|Grade 9
Threads of Curiosity
In 2010, scientist J. Craig Venter and his team made an important 
discovery in the field of synthetic biology. They first studied the 
complete DNA sequence of a simple bacterium called Mycoplasma 
mycoides using a computer programming. Then, they chemically 
synthesised (in the laboratory) an exact copy of this DNA.
Next, they took another closely related bacterium and removed its 
DNA, but kept the rest of the cell (such as the cytoplasm and the cell 
membrane) intact. They inserted the synthetic DNA into this cell. After 
this, the cell started to grow and divide, following the instructions 
from the newly inserted synthetic DNA. This experiment showed that 
DNA controls the structure and activities of a cell. 
However, scientists did not create a completely new cell from 
scratch. Only the DNA was synthetic. The other parts of the cell were 
taken from an already existing living cell.
2.4 How do Normal Cells Grow and Divide?
When you get a small cut on your skin, it heals after a few days. When hair 
fall out, new hair grow back. How does this happen? It happens because 
cells in our body can grow and divide to replace the old, dead, or damaged 
cells. When our body grows, it is not just because cells get bigger. Cells can 
grow only up to a certain size but growth happens because cells divide 
to form new cells. Let us study freshly growing root tips of an onion to 
understand how cells divide (Fig. 2.16).
Activity 2.5: Let us enhance our skills
1. Take a jar and fill it up with plain water.
2. Now, place an onion bulb over the jar in such a way that its base 
bearing roots, is immersed in the water. 
3. Leave the setup for 5–6 days and observe. Do you observe the roots 
growing? Cut 2–3 cm of the freshly grown roots and transfer them 
to freshly prepared aceto-alcohol (glacial acetic acid:ethanol :: 1:3). 
Keep the root tips in aceto-alcohol for 24 hours and then transfer 
them to 70 per cent ethanol (for preservation).
4. Take one or two preserved roots, wash them in water and then, place 
them on a clean slide. 
5. Put one drop of dilute Hydrochloric acid (HCl) on the root tips to 
soften the tissue. Rinse the roots after 10–15 minutes. Then add 2–3 
drops of aceto-carmine stain on them. 
6. Leave the slide for 5–10 minutes and then, gently warm it (with 
caution) over a spirit lamp.
7. Cut the tip portion of the root on the slide and put a coverslip. 
Gently squash the coverslip with your thumb to spread the cells 
on the slide.
8. Observe the slide under a microscope.
Fig. 2.16: Growing 
roots of an onion in a 
jar containing water
Chapter-02.indd 20 03-Apr-26 7:27:59 PM
