Cell: The Building Block of Life 21
What do you observe? Do you observe the cells of the onion root tip? 
Are they similar in structure? Do you find any structural differences in 
these cells? If yes, why is it so? 
This is because the cells of a growing tip of root of onion divide 
continuously. This process is called cell division. Fig. 2.17 shows various 
stages of cell division. Therefore, these cells exhibit different structures 
corresponding to different stages of cell division. Can you identify which 
stage comes first during cell division? 
Every day, an estimated hundreds of billions of cells in our body are 
replaced, which is almost 1 per cent of the total number of cells in our body. 
Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells divide, but eukaryotic cells divide in 
a more controlled and orderly manner by a process called the cell cycle. 
You will learn about the stages of cell division in higher grades.
Fig. 2.17: Different stages of cell division in onion root tip cells
2.4.1 Cell division
Cell division is the process by which new cells are formed from 
pre‑existing cells. It allows living organisms to grow, repair damaged 
tissues and reproduce. Some cells, such as skin cells divide continuously 
to replace cells that are lost regularly. There are two major types of 
cell division — mitosis and meiosis. Mitosis is important for normal 
growth, repair, maintenance and asexual reproduction, while meiosis is 
important for sexual reproduction for creation of genetic diversity.
Mitosis
Every human begins life as a single fertilised 
egg. This one cell divides repeatedly to form 
trillions of cells in the body. Cells increase in 
number through mitosis, which is the most 
common type of cell division (Fig. 2.18).
Mitosis produces two genetically identical 
daughter cells from one parent cell. Each new 
cell gets the same DNA and the same number of 
chromosomes as the parent cell. This ensures 
that genetic information is largely maintained 
across body cells. Fig. 2.18: Mitosis is the process 
that produces two genetically 
identical daughter cells
Next
Level
Up
Chapter-02.indd 21 03-Apr-26 7:27:59 PM
