22 Exploration|Grade 9
Meiosis
Meiosis is a type of cell division that produces gametes 
and occurs only in the cells of reproductive organs. 
Gametes produced for sexual reproduction create 
variations and diversity among living organisms. 
Therefore, children resemble their parents but are 
not exactly the same. In animals including humans, 
meiosis occurs only in the cells of testes of males to 
produce sperm and ovaries of females to produce 
eggs. In plants, meiosis occurs in the anthers (male 
parts) to form pollen grains (that later produce sperm 
cells) and the ovaries (female parts) to produces egg 
cells. In meiosis, the parent cell divides twice, one 
after the other, to form four daughter cells (Fig. 2.19).
During the first division, the cells divide into two 
daughter cells and the number of chromosomes in 
each daughter cell is reduced to half. The second 
division is similar to mitosis where each daughter cell 
divides into two thus, forming four daughter cells with 
half the number of chromosomes. As a result, each 
gamete has half the number of DNA compared to the 
parent cell. During fertilisation, when gametes from 
two individuals combine, the original chromosome 
number is restored. You will learn about this process 
in detail in Chapter 11.
Scientists have developed methods to grow plant and animal 
cells outside the body in special conditions. This is called cell 
culture. In this process, cells are taken from an organism and 
placed in a nutrient-rich medium that allows them to grow 
and multiply. To keep the culture safe, the right temperature, 
acidic or alkaline conditions and moisture under sterile 
conditions are maintained. Cell culture is crucial for studying 
how cells work and for the production of biochemicals, food, 
medicines, vaccines, and more.
Bridging Science and Society
The processes of mitosis and meiosis must occur in a 
proper and controlled manner. What happens if meiosis 
and mitosis do not happen properly? If there is any error 
in these processes, it can lead to various problems in the 
body of an organism.
Errors in mitosis lead to uncontrolled cell divisions. 
This can lead to the formation of tumours and abnormal 
number of chromosomes in body cells.
Errors in meiosis may result in genetic disorders, 
which may be associated with developmental problems 
or distinctive physical features. Faulty meiosis may also 
cause early pregnancy loss or reduced fertility.
Next
Level
Up
Meet a Scientist
Arun 
Kumar 
Sharma
was a 
famous 
Indian 
scientist 
known for 
his work on chromosomes. 
As a botanist, he is known 
for his work in the area of 
plant taxonomy, evolution 
and development. He also 
invented many useful 
lab methods to study 
chromosomes in plants. For 
his contributions to botany, 
he received many honours, 
including the Shanti 
Swarup Bhatnagar award 
and Padma Bhushan.
Pause and Ponder
6. Instead of many small ones, why 
does a cell not have a single giant 
mitochondrion? How does this 
relate to the concept of surface 
area?
7. If the skin cells start dividing by 
meiosis instead of mitosis, what 
do you think will happen to a 
cut on the skin?
Fig. 2.19: Meiosis is a two-step process 
that produces four gametes 
Chapter-02.indd 22 03-Apr-26 7:28:00 PM
