Cell: The Building Block of Life 23
2.5 Cell Theory — The Unifying Principle of Biology
An important observation about living organisms is that all 
organisms are made up of cells. In 1838, a German botanist 
named Matthias Schleiden reported that all plants are made 
up of cells. In 1839, German zoologist Theodor Schwann, found 
that all animals are also made up of cells. Later, in 1855, a 
German scientist named Rudolf Virchow, further expanded 
the Cell Theory by stating that new cells are formed only from 
pre-existing cells. Together, their work led to the formulation of 
the Cell Theory. 
According to the classical Cell Theory:
y All living organisms are made up of one or more cells.
y The cell is the basic unit of structure and function in living 
beings.
y All cells arise from pre-existing cells.
This unifies all biology, from bacteria to humans, and explains 
life’s continuity through cell division.
2.5.1 Do cells grow and reproduce forever?
Cells grow and divide in a controlled way, stay in the right place, 
carry out their functions, and eventually die when they are no 
longer needed. Dead cells are replaced by new cells that carry 
out the same function. Thus, every cell has a definite life span. If 
cells do not die when they should or if they die too early problems 
can arise in the body. In many animal cells, cell division usually 
stops when cells come in contact with neighbouring cells. This 
process is called contact inhibition. However, cancer cells lose 
this control and keep dividing uncontrollably, leading to the 
formation of tumours. Plant cells grow differently. Due to their 
rigid cell walls plant cells do not show contact inhibition and 
follow a different pattern of growth. 
Even though cells are extremely tiny they perform 
remarkable functions. They produce energy, synthesise and 
secrete substances, divide to form new cells, and work together 
to maintain the proper functioning of the body. Every living being 
from a tiny bacterium to a giant tree is made up of cells. You are 
one of the products of these tiny hardworking cells.
Ready to Go Beyond 
How do cells monitor their growth to maintain a balance?
Cells also have natural ways of dying to maintain a balance. 
Programmed Cell Death (PCD) is a genetically regulated and 
organised process of selective cell destruction. It is essential for 
normal development, cellular quality control and immune function. 
When an embryo develops, the PCD helps form fingers by eliminating 
cells between digits, without it we would have webbed hands.
Explore different ways by which cells maintain themselves.
How do cancer cells grow 
and spread? 
Normal cells grow, age 
and die in a controlled 
manner. Sometimes, this 
system breaks down, 
and abnormal cells start 
growing and dividing 
uncontrollably. This 
results in the formation 
of tumours, which may 
be benign or malignant. 
Cancerous tumours can 
invade nearby tissues 
and even spread to other 
parts of the body to form 
new tumours.
Threads of 
Curiosity
Meet a Scientist
In 1902, the 
Austrian 
botanist, 
Gottlieb 
Haberlandt,
proposed 
that any 
living plant cell, even 
a fully mature cell from 
a permanent tissue, can 
develop into a complete 
plant if it is provided with 
suitable nutrients and 
favourable conditions. He 
suggested that plant cells 
have the ability to form 
different types of cells and 
also change them. This 
special ability of plant 
cells is called totipotency. 
Haberlandt’s idea laid 
the foundation for a new 
branch of biology known 
as Plant Tissue Culture 
Technology.
Chapter-02.indd 23 03-Apr-26 7:28:00 PM
