26 Exploration|Grade 9
8. A researcher carried out an experiment in which she took two carrots 
of similar size. She placed one carrot in plain water and the other carrot 
in concentrated salt solution (Fig. 2.21). After 24 hours she recorded her 
observations.
(i) What hypothesis does she want to test through this experiment?
(ii) What would you suggest for the improvement of this experiment?
(iii) Why does the carrot in plain water stay stiff and crunchy, but the 
carrot in concentrated salt solution become rubbery and limp?
9. Indicate the presence or absence of following structures in bacterial 
and animal cells: 
Structures in a cell Bacterial cell Animal cell
Chromosome
Nucleus
Mitochondria
Golgi complex
Chromoplasts
10. Carry out the following experiment:
Take four peeled potato halves and scoop each one out to make potato 
cups. One of these potato cups should be made from a boiled potato. 
Place each of the potato cups in a beaker containing water (Fig. 2.22). 
Now, set up the experiment as follows:
(a) Keep Cup A empty.
(b) Add one teaspoon sugar in Cup B.
(c) Add one teaspoon salt in Cup C.
(d) Add one teaspoon sugar in the boiled potato in Cup D.
Observe the four potato cups at least two hours and answer the following 
questions:
(i) Explain why water gathers in the hollowed portion of Cup B and 
Cup C.
(ii) Why is Cup A necessary for this experiment?
(iii) Explain why water does not gather in the hollowed portions of 
Cups A and D.
11. Identify the pair that incorrectly matches the cell organelle with 
its function.
(i) Ribosome — Protein synthesis
(ii) SER — Lipid and cellulose synthesis
(iii) Lysosome — Digestion of foreign agents
12. What outcome do you expect, if all the mitochondria are removed from 
a eukaryotic cell?
13. Which phenomenon inhibits the formation of tumors in the human 
body? Can plants also develop tumors? Explain.
AB
Fig. 2.21: Experimental 
set-up having carrot 
(a) in plain water, and 
(b) in salt solution
Fig. 2.22: Experimental 
set-up
Chapter-02.indd 26 03-Apr-26 7:28:01 PM
