Cell: The Building Block of Life 27
The Journey Beyond
y Use selected software or digital tools to create animations or simulations 
of cell division and share them in the class.
y Create a model of any type of a ‘synthetic cell’ using low-cost eco-friendly 
material. 
y Build a mitosis or meiosis model with your classmates for your science 
project or exhibition. How did teamwork contribute to the success of 
the activity? Did this activity change your perspective or understanding 
of the cell division topic in any way? If so, explain how? 
y Develop a nukkad natak for community awareness in simple dialogues 
about the different functions of cell organelles.
14. The cell membrane of a cell is made up of proteins and lipids. Which 
cell organelles help in the synthesis of cell membrane? Write the path of 
these compounds from their site of synthesis to the cell membrane and 
show this through a labelled diagram. 
15. What would happen if gametes are formed by mitotic divisions?
16. A farmer, Deepa, was very happy with the harvest of amla (Indian 
Gooseberry) and lemons on her farm. However, she could sell only one￾fourth of the produce in the local market. Recognising that a significant 
amount of produce may be lost post-harvest, she employed a traditional 
yet scientifically sound method to extend the shelf life of amla and 
lemons. She turned perishable produce into profitable products, such 
as pickles and sharbat. She used the excess produce to prepare pickles, 
murabbas, and sharbat by adding appropriate amounts of salt, sugar, 
or jaggery to small pieces of fruit and their juices. These were then 
stored in small glass bottles for sale, helping her prevent the wastage 
of post-harvest produce. This shift from farming to agro-processing 
would strengthen food security and boost the local economy, creating a 
sustainable model that cuts waste while increasing her income. Based 
on the above passage answer the following questions:
(i) Which scientific concept has the farmer applied in the preservation 
of the farm produce? 
(ii) How does the addition of high concentrations of salt and sugar 
create an environment that prevents the growth of spoilage-causing 
bacteria and fungi?
(iii) Suggest a healthy recipe of this kind for food preservation. 
(iv) What are the scientific values addressed in this case?
What is the future of the development of synthetic cells using non-living chemicals? 
If a synthetic cell is developed, what may be the related ethical issues?
The Quest Continues …
Chapter-02.indd 27 03-Apr-26 7:28:02 PM
