APPLICATION OF INTEGRALS 299
of integration. The greatest development of method of exhaustion in the early
period was obtained in the works of Eudoxus (440 B.C.) and Archimedes
(300 B.C.)
Systematic approach to the theory of Calculus began in the 17th century.
In 1665, Newton began his work on the Calculus described by him as the theory
of fluxions and used his theory in finding the tangent and radius of curvature at
any point on a curve. Newton introduced the basic notion of inverse function
called the anti derivative (indefinite integral) or the inverse method of tangents.
During 1684-86, Leibnitz published an article in the Acta Eruditorum which
he called Calculas summatorius, since it was connected with the summation of
a number of infinitely small areas, whose sum, he indicated by the symbol ‘∫’. In
1696, he followed a suggestion made by J. Bernoulli and changed this article to
Calculus integrali. This corresponded to Newton’s inverse method of tangents.
Both Newton and Leibnitz adopted quite independent lines of approach which
was radically different. However, respective theories accomplished results that
were practically identical. Leibnitz used the notion of definite integral and what is
quite certain is that he first clearly appreciated tie up between the antiderivative
and the definite integral.
Conclusively, the fundamental concepts and theory of Integral Calculus and
primarily its relationships with Differential Calculus were developed in the work
of P.de Fermat, I. Newton and G. Leibnitz at the end of 17th century. However,
this justification by the concept of limit was only developed in the works of A.L.
Cauchy in the early 19th century. Lastly, it is worth mentioning the following
quotation by Lie Sophie’s:
“It may be said that the conceptions of differential quotient and integral which
in their origin certainly go back to Archimedes were introduced in Science by the
investigations of Kepler, Descartes, Cavalieri, Fermat and Wallis .... The discovery
that differentiation and integration are inverse operations belongs to Newton
and Leibnitz”.
—v—
Reprint 2026-27
