145Governance and Democracy 6 – The State, the Government, and You
Fig. 6.4.
We often hear the words ‘state’ and ‘government’ used as if 
they mean the same thing. But they are not truly the same, even 
though they are closely related.
Roshini didi, today we had a class on the difference between a state and a government. 
I am a bit confused. Since you are studying Political Science in college, can you tell me 
why it is important to have a permanent population for a place to become a state? Can a 
state not be a place where people can just go, visit, and come back?
First, without people, meaning a population, there can be no state. Second, if people just 
go visit and then move on then they are like tourists, with no identification with the place 
nor anything that is common and shared — they don’t live together. But when people 
identify with a place or a territory, and usually live there, then they form a permanent 
population. Such a group of people — the permanent population — then develops its own 
culture and society, which also identifies with that geographically defined territory — the 
place where they live.
What exactly is a 
geographically defined 
territory? So, population 
and territory 
as a part 
of the state 
are clear. That 
also then explains why 
the government is a part 
of the state, but it is not 
the state. Because people 
live together, they need 
laws to be made and 
implemented for the state to 
function, which is what the 
government does.
What does 
sovereignty mean, 
and why is it essential 
for a state?
It is a place, a 
geographical area, 
that has clear 
boundaries. The 
boundaries are not 
necessarily geographical 
features but sort of lines 
that are agreed upon by 
the neighbouring states 
that separate these 
states.
Sovereignty means that the state has complete control over its own 
matters and is able to make and implement laws in accordance with 
its own needs. No other state or external body can interfere in the 
internal affairs of that state. This is why sovereignty is an essential 
feature of a state.
Chapter 6.indd 145 29-11-2025 10:42:46
Reprint 2026-27
