148Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
LET’S EXPLORE
Make lists of different government departments you are 
familiar with, or whose names you may have seen on boards 
around your home or on your way to school. What functions 
do you think they perform?
These departments form part of the executive function of the 
government. They implement the policies and laws made by 
the legislature. The judiciary, in turn, ensures that these laws 
are followed. Together, the legislature, executive, and judiciary 
form the three key pillars of government. However, in our daily 
lives, we primarily interact with the various departments that 
form part of the executive. 
In an earlier chapter, we surveyed the different forms of 
governments that exist, or have existed, across the world, 
including democracies, monarchies, theocracies, dictatorships, 
and oligarchies. We saw how democracies give people the power 
to choose their leaders, and how this differs from governments 
where power stays within one family or group. In a democracy 
like India, the government is expected to work for everyone’s 
wellbeing and protect our rights and freedoms. 
In some countries, the legislature, executive and judiciary are 
separate, while in others they may overlap.
Democracy and Republic
Your textbook carries the Preamble to the Constitution. Notice 
how the Constitution makers used the words ‘democratic’ 
and ‘republic’ together. Why did they, when ‘democracy’ and 
‘republic’ are often used interchangeably? Though political 
scientists discuss the distinction between these two concepts in 
detail, we will look at it in a simplified way.
British rule in India persisted for nearly two centuries. When 
India got Independence, she did not blindly adopt the British 
parliamentary system. Among the many discussions and debates 
that took place during the making of our Constitution, one was 
on the type of parliamentary democracy that India should have.
Chapter 6.indd 148 11/27/2025 12:30:44 PM
Reprint 2026-27
