155Governance and Democracy 6 – The State, the Government, and You
The bureaucracy is a hierarchical structure, as can be seen in 
this chart (Fig. 6.11). Such structures exist at the level of the 
district and block, too. 
In India, the most well-known bureaucracies are the Indian 
Foreign Service (IFS), the Indian Administrative Service (IAS), 
the Indian Police Service (IPS), Indian Revenue Service (IRS) and 
the Indian Forest Service (IFoS). There are a large number of 
officers working in these systems (see Fig 6.11 for an example). 
Our interactions are usually with the bureaucrats serving at 
the grassroots — government school teachers, anganwadi 
workers, health workers, water and sanitation workers, or bus 
conductors. The bureaucracy manages large-scale programs 
like the census, national elections, disaster relief, and the rollout 
of welfare schemes such as the Viksit Bharat— Guarantee for 
Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin) Act, 2026 (VB- G RAM G) 
or the COVID-19 vaccination drive.
Chonira Belliappa Muthamma (1924–
2009), born in Karnataka, became the 
first woman to clear the examination
for public services in 1948 and the first 
woman to join the Indian Foreign Service 
in 1949, although a strong gender bias 
prevailed. Women, for instance, “were 
made to sign an undertaking that they 
would resign if they got married,” as C.B. 
Muthamma wrote later. Nevertheless, 
she managed to conduct a distinguished 
diplomatic career, eventually serving as India’s first woman 
ambassador in several countries.
When she was unjustly denied promotion, Muthamma 
approached the Supreme Court; a bench led by Justice V.R. 
Krishna Iyer struck down gender-biased provisions as violating 
the Constitution and made strong comments on the Ministry 
of External Affairs’ record of discrimination against women. 
Muthamma’s struggle thus remains a defining milestone in the 
pursuit of gender equality in Indian public service.
Fig. 6.12. Chonira 
Belliappa Muthamma
Chapter 6.indd 155 08-05-2026 14:02:09
Reprint 2026-27
