The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability 157
for tails is 1
2, because each is equally likely. In a random experiment, 
every outcome has a chance to occur, but you can only determine the 
likelihood, not the exact result. 
Have you wondered what makes an event like rain random? 
An event like rain is considered random because it depends on many 
complex factors in the atmosphere (such as temperature, humidity, 
wind patterns, and pressure) and is so sensitive to these factors that 
it is impossible to predict it with total certainty. Thus, it is impossible 
to know with absolute certainty whether it will rain on a specific day. 
Randomness in rain means that while the exact timing and location of 
rainfall cannot be predicted perfectly, we can estimate the likelihood 
or probability of rain in different locations based on patterns and 
probabilities derived from data.
Think and Reflect
Ask your friend to predict the outcome of a `1 coin you toss. 
Do you see that your friend could guess heads or tails but could not know 
for certain? That’s randomness! All possible results are known, but each 
individual try is unpredictable.
7.1.2 The Probability Scale 
Probability is measured on a scale from 0 to 1 to indicate the 
likelihood of the occurrence of an event. If the probability of your 
school winning the hockey match is 0.75, that means there is a 75% 
chance your school will win. This means that it is more likely than 
not that your school will win the match. If the probability of your 
school winning the hockey match is 0.5, that means there is a 50% 
chance your school will win. This means that it is equally likely that 
your school will win or lose the match. On the other hand, if the 
probability is 0, it would mean winning is impossible (for example, 
winning without playing), and if the probability is 1, it would mean 
your school is certain to win. The probabilities of most events fall 
somewhere strictly between 0 and 1, expressing how likely they are 
to happen.
Imagine a deck of six cards where the number of purple and 
green cards is unknown. The probability of picking a purple card 
from the deck (see Fig. 7.1) can range from impossible (if there are 
Chapter 7.indd 157 4/15/2026 3:04:56 PM
