164 Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
GAMBLER’S FALLACY
Many people think that if something random happens many times in a 
row (like flipping a coin and getting heads six times), then the opposite 
outcome (tails) is more likely to happen next. But actually, the coin does 
not keep track of what happened before. Every time you flip, the chance 
of heads or tails stays exactly the same — like starting afresh. The coin has 
no memory, so past flips do not change what happens next. This common 
misunderstanding is called Gambler’s Fallacy.
For example, imagine that you are flipping a fair coin. It comes up heads 
six times in a row. You might feel that on the next flip you are sure to get 
a tail, because tails haven’t come up for a while. However, the probability 
of getting tails on the next flip is still 50% or 
1
2, exactly the same as before. 
The coin has no memory of past flips!
Example 6: Let us say you are playing Snakes and Ladders, and you 
are rolling a fair 6-sided die to move. 
You have just rolled the die three times in a row, and each time you 
got a 6.
Now, you think: ‘I have already rolled three 6s — there is no way I 
will get a 6 again on the next roll!’
This thinking is Gambler’s Fallacy — because each roll of the die is 
an independent event. The probability of rolling a 6 is always: 
1
6 ≈ 0.166 
or 16.6%.
It does not change based on what happened in previous turns.
Key Idea: In Snakes and Ladders, as in many games of chance, 
each roll of dice is independent. The Gambler’s Fallacy tricks people 
into believing there is a pattern, when in fact, such randomness has no 
memory.
FAIR AND UNBIASED
When we speak of a coin, we assume it to be ‘fair’, i.e., it is symmetrical 
so that there is no reason for it to come down more often on one side 
than the other. We call this property of the coin as being ‘unbiased’. By 
the phrase ‘random toss’, we mean that the coin is allowed to fall freely 
without any bias or interference.
Chapter 7.indd 164 4/15/2026 3:05:00 PM
