Atomic Foundations of Matter 167
In the above activities, we have used many 
compounds. Let us learn how these are formed from 
the elements. Let us take an example of water, is there a 
fixed ratio in which hydrogen can combine with oxygen 
to form it, or can they combine in any ratio? This leads 
us to another important law.
9.2 Law of Constant Proportions
Soon after Lavoisier, Joseph Proust proposed that in any 
compound formed by two or more elements, the elements 
combine in a fixed ratio by mass. In other words, elements in 
a compound have definite proportions irrespective of its 
source. For example, if the water collected from various 
sources, such as rivers, borewells or the ocean, is purified 
and analysed. It is always found to contain hydrogen and 
oxygen in a mass ratio of 1:8. What does it convey? If 9 g 
of purified water from any source is decomposed, 1 g of 
hydrogen and 8 g of oxygen are always obtained. This 
proportion is written as 1:8.
This is known as the Law of Constant Proportions, 
or the Law of Definite Proportions, or sometimes as 
Proust’s Law.
In many ancient civilisations, red pigment derived from rocks was widely 
used in painting and as a colouring agent for various objects. In India, it was 
known as hingula, and in Latin and English, as cinnabar. Over the centuries, 
it was discovered in many civilisations that heating cinnabar could yield two 
elements — mercury and sulfur in mass percentage of around 86.22% and 
13.78%, respectively. Interestingly, most civilisations also found that grinding 
mercury and sulfur together in this ratio could form cinnabar, although the toxic 
nature of both prevented this process from becoming widespread.
Fig. 9.5: Cinnabar
Threads of Curiosity
Example 9.3: Sodium chloride (NaCl) contains sodium and chlorine in 
the mass ratio of 23:35.5. If 46 g of sodium reacts completely, how much 
chlorine is needed to form NaCl?
Solution: Mass of chlorine required = (35.5 ÷ 23) × 46 = 71 g
3. A compound consists of 40% sulfur and 60% oxygen by mass. In a sample of the same 
compound containing 20 g of sulfur, what mass of oxygen must be present to satisfy the Law 
of Constant Proportions?
4. Carbon monoxide (CO) contains carbon and oxygen in the mass ratio of 3:4. How much 
oxygen will combine with 9 g of carbon to form carbon monoxide?
5. The Law of Definite Proportions holds true for compounds but not for mixtures. Give reason.
6. Students X and Y, both prepared an oxide of copper by combining copper and oxygen in the 
ratios of 4:1 and 8:2, respectively. Do their results justify the Law of Constant Proportions? 
Explain.
Pause and Ponder
Joseph Louis 
Proust was a 
prominent French 
chemist known 
for his careful 
experimental 
work. He contributed to the 
Law of Definite Proportions 
by showing that chemical 
compounds always contain 
elements in fixed ratios by 
mass. For example, Proust 
studied the composition of 
copper carbonate. He showed 
that copper carbonate always 
contains copper, carbon and 
oxygen in the same proportion 
by mass, no matter how it 
was prepared or where it 
was found. His work laid 
an important foundation 
that helped shape modern 
chemistry.
Meet a Scientist
Chapter-09.indd 167 03-Apr-26 6:39:51 PM
