168 Exploration|Grade 9
The two laws discussed here formed the basis of Dalton’s Atomic 
Theory. This theory attempts to logically explain why substances combine 
in fixed proportions and why there is no loss or gain of mass during a 
chemical reaction. Dalton later explained these by proposing that during a 
chemical reaction, atoms are indivisible and merely rearrange, rather than 
being created or destroyed.
9.3 Dalton’s Atomic Theory
John Dalton proposed his atomic theory in terms of certain postulates. 
These postulates combined earlier experimental observations and served 
as the basis for modern scientific theory. A postulate is a fundamental 
assumption accepted as truth without formal proof from which further 
ideas are formed or developed.
John Dalton postulated that:
y All matter is made up of very tiny particles called 
atoms, which participate in chemical reactions.
y Atoms are indivisible particles, which cannot be created 
or destroyed in a chemical reaction.
y Atoms of a given element are identical in mass and 
chemical properties.
y Atoms of different elements have different masses and 
chemical properties.
y Atoms combine in the ratio of simple whole numbers to 
form compounds.
y The relative number and kinds of atoms are constant in 
a given compound.
Dalton’s postulates provide the basis for the modern 
understanding of atoms and their behaviour. 
For example, hydrogen and oxygen atoms combine to form water, but 
the atoms themselves are not destroyed or changed into something else. 
Similarly, when magnesium burns in air, a white powder of magnesium 
oxide forms. This shows that the atoms of magnesium have combined with 
those of oxygen to form magnesium oxide. 
7. Assertion (A): 2 g of hydrogen combines with 16 g of oxygen to form 18 g of water.
Reason (R): According to Dalton’s Atomic Theory, atoms combine in a simple whole number 
ratio by mass to form compounds.
Choose the correct option:
(i) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
(ii) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(iii) A is true, but R is false.
(iv) A is false, but R is true.
Pause and Ponder
Later, scientists discovered how atoms combine to form molecules.
Let us explore further!
John Dalton 
was born in 
England. In 1793, 
Dalton moved 
to Manchester 
to teach 
mathematics, physics and 
chemistry at a college. He spent 
most of his life teaching and 
researching there. In 1808, he 
presented his atomic theory, 
which proved to be a turning 
point in the study of matter.
Meet a Scientist
What if ...
atoms could 
combine in any 
ratio and not in a 
fixed ratio? How 
would this affect 
the substances 
around us?
Chapter-09.indd 168 03-Apr-26 6:39:53 PM
