Atomic Foundations of Matter 169
9.4 How Atoms Combine?
Atoms of an element can combine to form a molecule of that element. 
For example, a hydrogen molecule consists of two hydrogen atoms. 
Atoms of different elements combine to form a molecule of a compound. 
For example, one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom combine to 
form a molecule of hydrogen chloride. A molecule can be defined as an 
electrically neutral entity consisting of more than one atom that is capable 
of independent existence and shows all the properties of that substance. 
It should also be remembered that some elements, such as helium, exist 
only as atoms because its atoms are stable.
In Chapter 8, Journey Inside the Atom, you learnt that atoms with 
8 electrons in the outermost (valence) shell (2 electrons if the K-shell is the 
outermost shell) are stable. If the number of electrons in a valence shell 
is less than eight, then they may share, gain or lose electrons to complete 
their valence shell and become stable. In this process, atoms of elements 
combine to form compounds. This generally takes place in two ways. These 
are:
y Sharing of electrons — Share a few or all of their valence electrons 
with another atom.
y Transfer of electrons — Transfer one or more of the valence electrons 
to another atom, or accept one or more electrons from some other atom.
When atoms combine, the total energy of the system becomes lower 
than the sum of the energies of the individual atoms, making the resulting 
arrangement more stable. The force that holds atoms together is called a 
chemical bond. Let us explore it further.
9.4.1 Bonding by sharing of electrons — Covalent Bond
A. Molecules of elements
Let us understand the formation of molecules of elements by the sharing of 
electrons, as described below.
Consider the formation of a hydrogen 
molecule:
y Write the electronic configuration of 
hydrogen (atomic number 1). It has only 
one electron in the K-shell.
y Since, a K-shell can have a total of two 
electrons, it needs one more electron to become stable.
Thus, a hydrogen atom shares one electron with another hydrogen 
atom to form a hydrogen molecule (H2
), as shown in Fig. 9.6. The shared 
pair of electrons attracts both the nuclei and makes the molecule stable. 
This type of interaction between atoms through a shared pair of electrons 
is called a covalent bond. If two atoms are joined by sharing one electron 
each, they are said to be joined by a single bond.
This is generally depicted by drawing a single line between the symbols 
of the two atoms as H—H.
Let us take the case of a chlorine molecule.
Hydrogen atom
+
Hydrogen atom Hydrogen molecule
Fig. 9.6: Formation of a hydrogen molecule
Chapter-09.indd 169 03-Apr-26 6:39:53 PM
