170 Exploration|Grade 9
The chlorine atom has seven electrons in its valence shell. 
Each chlorine atom requires one electron to attain a stable 
electronic configuration. A chlorine molecule is formed by the 
sharing of one electron each by two chlorine atoms, as shown 
in Fig. 9.7. This shared pair of electrons holds the two chlorine 
atoms together as a molecule.
 Fig. 9.7: Formation of a chlorine molecule 
Chlorine 
atom
Chlorine 
atom
Chlorine molecule
+
Since, the two atoms that share one electron pair are said to 
be bonded by a single covalent bond, the chlorine (Cl2
) molecule 
can be represented as Cl— Cl.
Let us explore the bonding in an oxygen molecule. 
Write down the electronic configuration of the oxygen 
atom (atomic number 8). You can observe that the number of 
electrons present in its valence shell is six, and it requires two 
more electrons to complete its octet.
So, two oxygen atoms share two electrons each, forming an 
oxygen molecule (O2
), as shown in Fig. 9.8.
Oxygen atom Oxygen atom Oxygen molecule
Fig. 9.8: Formation of an oxygen molecule 
+
In this case, the two atoms are joined by two pairs of shared electrons, 
and are held together by a double bond. It can be depicted by drawing two 
lines between two oxygen atoms as O=O.
B. Molecules of compounds
In the section 9.4.1A, you learnt about the formation of molecules of 
elements, where two atoms of the same element combine. What happens if 
atoms of two different elements combine? Let us understand by taking an 
example of the formation of hydrogen chloride molecule. 
You can do it by using the following steps:
y Write the electronic configurations of hydrogen and chlorine atoms 
(atomic number of hydrogen is 1 and chlorine is 17). 
y Calculate the number of electrons required by chlorine to complete its 
octet and by hydrogen to complete its duplet.
Together we are strong …
Just as atoms share 
electrons to form covalent 
bonds, we too, can share 
and care to build strong 
relationships with people 
around us. This sharing 
brings unity and stability, 
laying the foundation for 
a stronger community, 
and ultimately, a strong 
nation. 
8. Nitrogen has five 
valence electrons. Draw 
the structure of the 
nitrogen molecule (N2
).
9. The atomic number of 
fluorine is 9. Explain 
the formation of the 
fluorine molecule (F2
).
Pause and Ponder
Chapter-09.indd 170 03-Apr-26 6:39:54 PM
