Atomic Foundations of Matter 171
You must have noticed that atoms of both hydrogen and chlorine need 
one electron each to attain stable electronic configurations. Hence, both the 
atoms share one electron each to form a molecule of hydrogen chloride, as 
shown in Fig. 9.9.
Fig. 9.9: Formation of a hydrogen chloride molecule
Chlorine atom Hydrogen chloride molecule
+
Hydrogen atom
Since the hydrogen and chlorine atoms in a hydrogen chloride (HCl) 
molecule bond by sharing electrons, it is a covalent compound. Also, since 
hydrogen and chlorine atoms share one pair of electrons, they are bonded 
by a single bond and it can be depicted as H— Cl.
You know that hydrogen and oxygen combine to form water. 
Hydrogen needs only one electron, while oxygen needs two 
electrons to acquire stable electronic configurations. How can 
oxygen share its two electrons with another atom that requires 
only one electron? This is achieved by two hydrogen atoms sharing 
an electron each with an oxygen atom, as shown in Fig. 9.10.
+ +
Hydrogen 
atom
Oxygen 
atom
Hydrogen 
atom
Water 
molecule
Fig. 9.10: Formation of a water molecule
Thus the water molecule formed is represented as H2
O, which 
indicates the presence of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom.
Atoms can release enormous energy when their nuclei split or combine to 
form new elements. This is called atomic or nuclear energy, and it plays a 
vital role in modern life. Beyond electricity generation, it is used in medicine, 
scientific research and space exploration. In nuclear power plants, the 
thermal energy from nuclear reactions produces steam that drives turbines 
and generates electricity, a cleaner alternative to fossil fuels. In India, 
scientists like Raja Ramanna (often called the Father of the Indian Nuclear 
Programme) made significant contributions in developing the nation’s 
Nuclear Energy Programme and promoting its peaceful use for development.
Bridging Science and Society
C. Naming covalent compounds
Covalent compounds are named by indicating the number of atoms of each 
element in the compound. To name these compounds, a prefix system is 
10. Show the formation 
of the following 
molecules:
(i) Carbon dioxide 
(CO2
)
(ii) Hydrogen sulfide 
(H2
S)
(iii) Ammonia (NH3
) 
11. Neon (atomic 
number 10) neither 
transfers nor shares 
its valence electrons. 
Explain.
Pause and Ponder
Chapter-09.indd 171 03-Apr-26 6:39:57 PM
