172 Exploration|Grade 9
used to indicate the number of atoms of each element in the molecule. The 
first element retains its regular name, while the second element ends in -ide. 
Prefixes, such as mono- (1), di- (2), tri- (3), tetra- (4), penta- (5), hexa- (6), etc., 
indicate the number of atoms. However, mono- is usually omitted for the first 
element but is used for the second element. If a prefix ends with ‘o’ or ‘a’ and 
the element starts with a vowel, drop the last vowel (for example, monoxide, 
pentoxide). If the prefix ends with ‘i’, keep it for pronunciation (for example, 
dioxide, trioxide).
Examples
y CO is named as carbon monoxide (not monooxide).
y CO2
 is named as carbon dioxide (not monocarbon dioxide).
y CS2
 is named as carbon disulfide, showing two sulfur atoms.
y PCl3
 is named as phosphorus trichloride, showing three chlorine atoms.
y SF6
 is named as sulfur hexafluoride, showing six fluorine atoms.
y N2
O4
 is named as dinitrogen tetroxide (not tetraoxide).
y N2
O5
 is named as dinitrogen pentoxide.
When hydrogen is the first element in the formula, no prefix is added 
before hydrogen, irrespective of the number of its atoms. For example, H2
S 
is named hydrogen sulfide, not dihydrogen sulfide.
A few binary compounds are known only by their common names. 
For example, H2
O, which would usually be named hydrogen monoxide, 
is commonly known as water. Similarly, NH3
, which is actually nitrogen 
trihydride, is known as ammonia.
9.4.2 Bonding by electron transfer — Ionic bond
If the valence shell of an atom has less than four electrons, it would 
generally donate its valence electrons to achieve a stable electronic 
configuration. Identify four such elements among the first 18 elements by 
using their electronic configurations given in Table 8.4 of the Chapter 8, 
Journey Inside the Atom. Atoms with more than 4 valence electrons 
usually gain or share electrons to complete an octet.
You are familiar with sodium chloride (common salt), whose chemical 
formula is NaCl. Let us take the bonding in NaCl as an example.
The atomic number of sodium is 11. Its valence shell contains only one 
electron, which can attain a stable electronic configuration after losing this 
valence electron. Will it still be neutral after losing one electron? If not, 
what charge would it carry and why?
When sodium atom (Fig. 9.11a) loses its valence electron, it becomes 
a positively charged species, called a sodium cation, represented as Na+
(Fig. 9.11b). It is so because it would have 11 protons and 10 electrons.
Fig. 9.11: Formation of a sodium cation
Sodium loses one 
electron 
(a) Sodium atom (Na) (b) Sodium cation (Na+
) 
+
+ e –
Chapter-09.indd 172 03-Apr-26 6:39:57 PM
