Atomic Foundations of Matter 173
On the other hand, the electronic configuration of a chlorine atom 
shows that it has seven valence electrons (Fig. 9.12a). It can attain a stable 
electronic configuration by gaining one electron from another atom. After 
gaining one extra electron, it acquires a negative charge and is called a 
chloride anion, represented as Cl–
 (Fig. 9.12b).
Fig. 9.12: Formation of a chloride anion
+ e –
(a) Chlorine atom (Cl) (b) Chloride anion (Cl –
) 
Chlorine accepts 
one electron 
Cations and anions are collectively called ions. Once the sodium and 
chloride ions are formed, they are held together by the electrostatic force 
of attraction due to their opposite charges (Fig. 9.13). The electrostatic force 
of attraction between oppositely charged ions that holds them together is 
called an ionic bond.
Na. + Cl Na+
 + Cl –
 NaCl
Fig. 9.13: Formation of sodium chloride by transfer of electron
Ionic compounds usually do not remain as single units. They form 
three-dimensional (3-D) crystals in which ions are arranged in a repeating pattern. 
For example, in sodium chloride (NaCl), each sodium ion (Na+
) is surrounded by six 
chloride ions (Cl–
), and each chloride ion is surrounded by six sodium ions (Fig. 9.14a). 
These oppositely charged ions are arranged in a regular, repeating 3-D pattern known 
as a crystal structure (Fig. 9.14b). 
Fig. 9.14: Sodium chloride: (a) crystals, (b) crystal structure, and (c) crystal lattice
(a)
Cl–
Cl–
Na+
Na+
(b) (c)
The crystal structure is represented as a crystal lattice, with ions 
depicted as points or dots (Fig. 9.14c). It helps to visualise the arrangement 
of ions in the crystal. You will learn more about the crystal structure in 
higher grades.
Next 
Level 
Up
Threads of Curiosity
Some elements like sulfur have six electrons in their outer shell and need 
to gain two electrons to complete their octet. When a sulfur atom gains two 
electrons, it acquires two units of negative charge and is represented as S2–
.
–
Chapter-09.indd 173 03-Apr-26 6:39:59 PM
