178 Exploration|Grade 9
4. Take two carbon or metal electrodes and insert 
them into a piece of cardboard by drilling two 
holes.
5. Connect one end of each electrode to the terminals 
of the 9 V battery and to the light bulb.
6. Test the electrical conductivity of each solid 
sample and observe whether the bulb glows. 
Record your observations. 
7. Test the electrical conductivity of each sample 
dissolved in water by transferring the solution to 
the beaker one at a time and observing whether 
the bulb glows (Fig. 9.15). 
8. Record your observations with other samples 
given in Table 9.2.
(a) Sodium chloride
(b) Copper sulfate
Fig. 9.16: Ionic 
compounds 
Fig. 9.15: Experimental set-up for electrical 
conductivity of a solution
Cardboard
Electrodes
Sample
Bulb
9 V Battery
Beaker
Table 9.2: Solubility and electrical conductivity observations 
Compound
Experiments
Solubility in Electrical conductivity of 
compounds in
water kerosene petrol solid state water
Camphor
Sodium chloride
Copper sulfate
Sugar
Naphthalene
Any other
9. Group the compounds showing similar properties listed in Table 9.2. 
Ionic compounds like sodium chloride (Fig. 9.16a) and copper sulfate 
(Fig. 9.16b) are generally soluble in water but insoluble in solvents, such 
as kerosene and petrol. In contrast, most covalent compounds, such as 
camphor (Fig. 9.17a) and naphthalene (Fig. 9.17b) are insoluble in water 
but dissolve in kerosene and petrol. 
Ionic compounds do not conduct electricity in the solid state because 
their ions are held in fixed positions by strong forces. To conduct electricity, 
ions must be free to move, which occurs only when the ionic compounds, 
such as sodium chloride and copper sulfate, are dissolved in water. On 
the other hand, some covalent compounds, such as sugar, are soluble in 
water but do not provide ions in solution; therefore, they do not conduct 
electricity. Other covalent compounds, such as camphor and naphthalene, 
also do not conduct electricity. Can you give a reason?
Predict whether ionic and covalent compounds would conduct 
electricity in the molten state (the melted state of a substance). 
Chapter-09.indd 178 03-Apr-26 6:40:03 PM
