180 Exploration|Grade 9
Example 9.7
Formula unit mass of calcium nitrate, Ca(NO3
)2
Atomic mass — Ca = 40 u; N = 14 u; O = 16 u
Formula unit mass of Ca(NO3
)2
 = (40 u × 1) + {(14 u × 1) + (16 u × 3)} × 2
 = 164 u
23. Find the formula unit mass of potassium chloride (KCl). 
Atomic mass — K = 39 u; Cl = 35.5 u.
24. Find the formula unit mass of magnesium hydroxide, Mg(OH)2
.
Atomic mass — Mg = 24 u; O = 16 u; H = 1 u.
Pause and Ponder
Understanding atoms, molecules and chemical bonding reveals the 
hidden science behind everything we use and consume each day. It shows 
how tiny atoms combine to build the universe we live in! 
y Mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. 
This is known as the Law of Conservation of Mass.
y A compound always contains the same elements combined in a 
fixed ratio by mass, no matter how it is formed or from where it is 
obtained. This is called the Law of Definite Proportions.
y A molecule is defined as an electrically neutral entity consisting of 
more than one atom that can exist independently and shows all its 
chemical properties. 
y Atoms combine to form molecules of elements or compounds 
to become stable. Atoms are held together by a force called a 
chemical bond.
y A covalent bond is formed by the sharing of electrons between 
atoms.
y An ionic bond is formed by the transfer of electrons between atoms, 
where one atom loses electrons and the other gains electrons to 
form cations and anions, respectively.
y The chemical formula of a covalent compound represents the 
elements and number of atoms of each element present in it.
y The chemical formula of an ionic compound represents the simplest 
whole number ratio of atoms of different elements present in it. 
y Molecular mass is the total mass of a molecule, calculated by adding 
the atomic masses of all the atoms constituting it.
y Formula unit mass of an ionic compound is the sum of the atomic 
masses of all the atoms present in a formula unit (simplest whole 
number ratio of ions in an ionic compound).
At a Glance
Chapter-09.indd 180 03-Apr-26 6:40:08 PM
