Chapter 6 — Pressure, Winds, Storms, and Cyclones 81
You must have observed fallen leaves on the ground swirling 
in the air or being swept away, and trees swaying or even 
bending when a strong wind blows. Have you ever wondered 
why fallen leaves rise in the air or trees sway or bend? Does the 
wind exert force on fallen leaves to make them rise or on trees 
to bend? Recall other similar effects of the force exerted by wind 
like slamming of doors or rattling of windows, or fluttering of 
clothes? How does the force exerted by wind make this happen? 
The force exerted by wind creates wind pressure which causes 
these effects. In this chapter, we will explore the relationship 
between force and pressure, and understand how they shape 
powerful natural events like thunderstorms and cyclones.
6.1 Pressure
Megha and her brother Pawan are going on a picnic. They walk 
to the picnic spot, carrying identical items in their bags (Fig. 6.1). 
On the way, Pawan keeps adjusting his bag, and looks 
uncomfortable. Megha asks, “Is there a problem with 
your bag?” Pawan responds, “Yes, it is hurting my 
shoulders.” Megha says, “Both our bags are equally 
heavy. Why does your bag hurt, and mine doesn’t?” 
Pawan reflects for a minute and says, “Perhaps, it is 
because of the difference in the straps of our bags. 
My bag has narrow straps while your bag has broad 
straps.”
Can the shape or size of the straps really make a 
difference? Let us try to find out.
When we carry a bag, we feel its weight because 
of the force of gravity acting on our shoulders. The 
weight of the bag with narrow straps acts on a 
smaller area of our shoulders, whereas the weight of 
the bag with broad straps is spread out over a larger 
area of our shoulders. It is due to this reason that we feel 
more comfortable carrying a bag with broader straps than one 
with narrow straps, although both bags have the same weight. 
Since the area over which the force acts is involved, we define 
a quantity called pressure, which is the force per unit area. 
So, Pressure = Force
Area
At this stage, we will consider only those forces which act 
perpendicular to the surface on which the pressure is to be computed.
Fig. 6.1: Megha and Pawan 
carrying their bags
Chapter 6.indd 81 6/28/2025 3:59:56 PM
Reprint 2026-27
