84
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Pour some more water in any one of the pipes 
used in Fig. 6.5. Observe the bulge of the balloon. 
Repeat this process a few times, adding more 
water each time and noting the extent of bulge as 
shown in Fig. 6.6. 
Do you see any relation between the amount 
of bulge of the rubber balloon and the height of 
the water column in the pipe? You must have 
observed that the bulge of the balloon increases 
as the height of the water column increases.
Thus, as the height of the water column in the pipe increases, 
the pressure at the bottom of the pipe also increases, which causes 
the balloon to bulge more. So, we can say that the pressure exerted 
by a liquid in a vessel depends on the height of its column. This 
is the reason why overhead tanks are placed at a height so that 
the pressure in the taps is increased, resulting in a good stream of 
water from the taps. 
Suppose you are living on the second floor of a three-storeyed 
building and an overhead water tank is placed on the top floor. 
Will you or your friend on the first floor receive a more powerful 
stream of tap water? Give reasons.
....................................................................................................................
Do liquids also exert pressure on the walls of the container? 
Let us find out by conducting the following activity.
Activity 6.2: Let us find out
z Take a used plastic bottle and remove its cap. Make 
four small holes near the bottom around the sides 
using a needle or a nail. Make sure that the holes are at 
the same height from the bottom as shown in Fig. 6.7. 
(If you find it difficult to make a hole, you can slightly 
heat the needle and poke it to make holes.) 
z Seal the holes with a tape and fill the bottle with water. 
z Now, remove the tape from all holes at the same time. 
z What do you observe? 
Water
More 
water
Balloon 
bulges 
out more
Balloon 
bulges 
out
Fig. 6.6: Higher heights of water column 
produce bigger bulge of the balloon
Bottle
Water
Holes
Fig. 6.7: Liquid exerts pressure 
on the wall of the container
What will happen to the 
bulge of the balloon if we 
increase the height of the 
water column? 
Chapter 6.indd 84 6/28/2025 4:00:03 PM
Reprint 2026-27
