Chapter 6 — Pressure, Winds, Storms, and Cyclones 85
You observe water flowing out through the holes on the 
sides of the bottle. What can you infer from this observation? 
It indicates that water also exerts pressure on the sides of a 
container. Therefore, we can conclude that liquids exert pressure 
not only at the bottom of the container, but also on its sides. In 
fact liquids exert pressure in all directions.
You must have seen water spurting out like a fountain from 
leaking joints or holes in water pipes. Can you explain why this 
happens? Is it due to the pressure exerted by water on the walls 
of the pipes?
Ever heard of ...
Do you know that the base of 
a dam is much broader than 
the top? This is because a 
broad base not only supports 
the structure of the dam, but 
also withstands the horizontal
water pressure near the bottom 
(Fig. 6.8). The water stored 
in the dam, exerts pressure 
horizontally on the side walls 
of the dam and vertically on 
the floor due to the height of the water level. The pressure which 
acts horizontally, is very large near its bottom. Thus, to withstand the 
pressure, the base of the dam is made broader.
Fig. 6.8: Dam
Let us now try to understand if air also exerts pressure.
6.2 Pressure Exerted by Air
You already know that air is all around us. The envelope of air 
surrounding the Earth is called atmosphere. The atmospheric 
air contains nitrogen, oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, and other 
gases in small quantities. The atmosphere extends up to many 
kilometres above the surface of the Earth.
Let us find out if the atmosphere exerts pressure by performing 
the following activity.
Activity 6.3: Let us explore
z Take a paper plate, invert it and attach a stick to it as shown 
in Fig. 6.9a. Place it on a plain surface.
z Take two identical sheets of chart paper about 70 cm × 56 cm 
each. Fold one sheet twice and make a hole in the centre of Fig. 6.9: (a) Inverted 
paper plate setup
Stick
Paper plate
Chapter 6.indd 85 6/28/2025 4:00:09 PM
Reprint 2026-27
