86
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
the folded chart paper sheet—big enough for the
stick to come out. Place the folded sheet on top 
of the inverted paper plate as shown in Fig. 6.9b.
z Now, try to lift the paper plate covered with a 
folded sheet using the stick.
z Observe how much effort is needed to lift it.
z Now, place the second unfolded chart paper 
sheet in place of the folded sheet. Make a hole at 
the centre of this chart paper for the stick to pass 
through. Cover the paper plate with the unfolded 
chart paper as shown in Fig. 6.9c.
z Lift the paper plate again and feel the effort 
needed in doing so.
z In which case is the lifting easier, with the folded 
or the unfolded chart paper covering the paper 
plate?
You would have observed that more effort is 
needed to lift the paper plate when it is covered with 
the unfolded chart paper, than with the folded chart 
paper. When we cover the paper plate with unfolded 
chart paper, the area of the covering sheet increases. 
The effort needed to lift the paper plate increases. 
Notice that the weight of the covering sheet has not 
changed. What can you infer from this? We can 
infer from these observations that air exerts force 
on the covering sheet, which makes it difficult to lift 
the paper plate. Moreover, this force increases with 
Fig. 6.10: A girl 
blowing a balloon
Fig. 6.9: (c) Inverted paper plate 
with unfolded chart paper
Fig. 6.9: (b) Inverted paper plate 
with two folds of chart paper
increase in the area of covering sheets. It means that the air is 
exerting a force on the paper plate, which increases as the area of 
the sheet covering it increases. As force per unit area is pressure, 
we can conclude that air exerts pressure on the paper sheet. In 
fact, air exerts pressure on all objects. The pressure exerted by 
air around us is known as the atmospheric pressure. 
You must have experienced that when you blow air into a 
balloon, it gets inflated. Why? This is because the air being filled 
inside the balloon exerts pressure on the walls of the balloon 
(Fig 6.10). Can we say that air exerts pressure in all directions? Yes, 
that is why the balloon expands in all directions. What happens 
when an inflated balloon is kept without closing its mouth? The 
air escapes from the balloon. Why does the air escape from 
the balloon? 
Chapter 6.indd 86 6/28/2025 4:00:10 PM
Reprint 2026-27
