Chapter 6 — Pressure, Winds, Storms, and Cyclones 87
Have you ever wondered how large the atmospheric pressure 
is? Let us get an idea about its magnitude by performing the 
following activity.
Activity 6.4: Let us perform
z Take a good-quality rubber sucker. Press it firmly against a 
smooth flat surface (Fig. 6.11). 
z Do you realise that it sticks to the surface?
z Now, try to pull it off. Do you find it difficult to pull it off? 
When we press the sucker, most of the air between its cup 
and the surface on which it is placed is pushed out and the air 
pressure inside it is reduced. The sucker sticks to the surface 
because the pressure of air surrounding the sucker is higher 
than the pressure exerted by the air inside the sucker. To pull the 
sucker off the surface, the applied force should be strong enough 
to overcome the pressure difference between outside the sucker 
and inside the sucker.
Do you know how large the atmospheric pressure is? The force 
exerted by the atmospheric air column over an area 15 cm × 15 cm 
is nearly equal to the force of gravity on an object of mass 225 kg 
(2250 N). The reason we are not crushed under this weight is that 
the pressure inside our bodies is also equal to the atmospheric 
pressure. This balances the pressure exerted from outside. The 
pressure inside our body is caused by the movement of fluids and 
gases in tissues and organs of the body.
6.3 Formation of Wind
You must have noticed that on some days, the wind blows strongly, 
whereas on other days, it is calm. Sometimes, wind becomes so 
strong that it causes damage to life and property. 
You must have seen that when an inflated balloon is kept 
without closing its mouth, the air from the balloon escapes. Recall 
that when there is a puncture in the bicycle tube, the air escapes 
and the tube collapses. In both of these cases, does air move from 
a high pressure region to a low pressure region? 
The SI unit of pressure is N/m2
, also known as pascal (Pa). However, 
the practical unit of air pressure is millibar (mb), which is equal to 
100 Pa. Air pressure is also expressed in hectopascal (hPa), which is 
equal to 100 Pa.
Fig. 6.11: A sucker
A step further
Chapter 6.indd 87 6/28/2025 4:00:13 PM
Reprint 2026-27
