88
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Let us find out from the following activity.
Activity 6.5: Let us observe
z Take two similar balloons made of thin rubber, 
and a drinking straw.
z Insert one end of the straw into one balloon and 
secure it with a rubber band or thread.
z Now inflate the second balloon and hold its mouth 
with your fingers, so that air does not escape.
z Insert the free end of the straw into the neck of 
the inflated balloon and secure it with a rubber 
band or thread. Make sure that the air does not leak from the 
balloon as the straw is inserted in it. Now you have one end 
of the straw inside the inflated balloon and the other end 
inside the uninflated balloon as shown in Fig. 6.12.
z Predict what would happen to the balloons.
z Observe what happens to both the balloons. Did it happen as 
predicted?
z Do you observe any change in the size of the balloons? Write 
down your observations.
....................................................................................................................
What can be the reason for the change in the sizes of the 
balloons? The air pressure in the inflated balloon is higher 
than that in the uninflated balloon. As a result, some air moves 
from the inflated balloon to the uninflated balloon, resulting in 
changes in the size of both the balloons.
Do you notice that after some time both the balloons attain 
almost the same size and the flow of air stops? Why does the air 
flow stop? The flow of air continues till the air pressure in the 
inflated balloon is higher than the air pressure in the uninflated 
balloon. The air flow stops when the pressure in both balloons 
becomes equal. At this stage, both balloons are almost of the 
same size. Thus, we can conclude that air moves from a region of 
high air pressure to a region of low air pressure. 
You can relate this conclusion to the directions of the sea breeze 
and land breeze, which you studied in Curiosity, Grade 7. As land 
gets heated faster than water during the day, the air above the land 
How do winds form?
Does the difference in air 
pressure have anything to do 
with the formation of winds?
Fig. 6.12: Air moves from a 
high pressure region to a low 
pressure region
Chapter 6.indd 88 6/28/2025 4:00:14 PM
Reprint 2026-27
