90
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
When high-speed winds blow over houses, 
a low-pressure area is created over them, 
as high-speed winds are accompanied by a 
reduced pressure. Therefore, the air pressure 
above the roofs of the houses is lower than the 
pressure below them. If the pressure difference 
is large and the roofs are weak, they may be 
blown away, as shown in Fig. 6.14a. That is 
why it is safer to keep doors and windows of 
the houses open during storms with high-speed 
winds. When the same wind moves over the 
roofs, and through the houses, the pressure 
difference between inside of the houses and 
over the roofs is reduced to a large extent. This 
helps prevent the roofs from being blown off as 
shown in Fig. 6.14b.
You must have experienced that when 
high-speed winds blow during storms, they 
are sometimes accompanied by thunder and 
lightning. Let us learn more about them.
6.5 Storms, Thunderstorms, and Lightning
Fig. 6.14: (b) Roof of a house intact
Fig. 6.14: (a) Roof of a house 
blown away
Have you heard the sound of 
thunder and seen lightning 
during the rainy season?
Yes, the sound of thunder 
is so frightening! Usually 
there is heavy rainfall too.
When land gets heated, the warm and moist air, being 
lighter, rises, thereby creating a low pressure area. Cooler 
air from the surrounding high-pressure areas flows to 
take its place. This air, in turn, gets heated and rises. 
This results in a continuous process of wind circulation.
As the rising air expands, it cools and moisture in it 
condenses to form water droplets, creating clouds. 
The water droplets merge to form heavier drops, 
which come down as rain, hail, or snow. The strong 
winds accompanied by rain is called a storm. In hot, 
humid, and tropical regions like India, storms are 
more frequent. Under certain conditions, warm air 
rises to great heights that the low temperature there 
converts water droplets into ice particles.
Strong winds blowing upwards and downwards 
Fig. 6.15: Strong winds going (Fig. 6.15) facilitate rubbing between water droplets up and down
Warm air
Cool air
Chapter 6.indd 90 16-09-2025 04:56:03
Reprint 2026-27
