Chapter 6 — Pressure, Winds, Storms, and Cyclones 91
 Fig. 6.17: Safe position 
during lightning
and ice particles. You have learnt in the chapter 
‘Exploring Forces’ that when two objects are rubbed 
against each other, they get charged. In this case, strong 
winds blowing upwards and downwards and rubbing 
against each other cause static electric charges to 
develop within the clouds.
The positively charged lighter ice particles move 
upwards and occupy the upper part of the clouds. The 
negatively charged heavier water droplets occupy the 
lower part of the clouds. Thus, a charge separation 
within the cloud takes place. Also, when the negatively 
charged lower part of the cloud moves closer to the 
ground, it causes the ground and nearby objects, such as trees or 
buildings, to become positively charged (Fig. 6.16).
Normally, air acts as an electrical insulator and does not 
let opposite charges meet. But when the build up of charges 
becomes very large, the insulating property of air breaks down. 
A sudden flow of charges takes place, producing a bright flash of 
light called lightning.
Lightning can occur as opposite charges collide within a cloud, 
between clouds, or between clouds and the ground. Lightning 
rapidly heats up the air around it, causing the air to expand and 
produce a loud sound known as thunder. A storm accompanied 
by lightning and thunder is called a thunderstorm.
A step further
Isolated and localised thunderstorms can sometimes occur in various 
regions of India. These thunderstorms are known by various names 
such as Kalboishakhi in West Bengal, Bihar, and Jharkhand and 
Bordoisila in Assam. They occur before the arrival of the monsoon, 
thereby helping kharif crops to grow. In Kerala, Karnataka, and 
Tamil Nadu, they are known as mango showers as they support the 
ripening of mangoes. Local thunderstorms in Karnataka help in the 
growth of coffee plants.
Lightning can be dangerous! It can ignite fires, 
damage buildings, and cause severe burns or death 
in humans and animals. We must take necessary 
precautions and protect ourselves from lightning. 
During lightning, stay away from tall objects, find a 
low-lying open area and crouch down, and minimise 
contact with the ground. Do not lie down flat. Avoid 
using an umbrella with a metallic rod. If you are in 
water, get out of it. If you are inside a bus or a car, you 
are comparatively safer.
 Fig. 6.16: Lightning
Chapter 6.indd 91 6/28/2025 4:00:24 PM
Reprint 2026-27
