Chapter 6 — Pressure, Winds, Storms, and Cyclones 93
Even as a cyclone loses its strength while travelling over land, 
it leaves behind a trail of destruction that can take months or even 
years to repair. Cyclones can be extremely destructive. For example, 
the Amphan cyclone in 2020 had peak wind speeds of 270 km/h. 
Strong winds during a cyclone push ocean water towards the 
shore, creating a wall of water that can be as high as 3–12 metres. 
This surge of water can flood coastal areas and even areas far 
from the sea. The heavy rainfall which accompanies a cyclone 
may cause rivers to overflow and can also trigger landslides. 
Seawater that rushes inland can contaminate drinking water 
sources and damage farmland. The salt in seawater can make soil 
less fertile, affecting crops. Roads may get blocked due to fallen 
trees and debris, making it difficult for help to reach the affected 
areas. Power outages can last for days, disrupting emergency 
services and daily life. 
How can we protect ourselves during cyclones? It is important 
to stay updated on weather reports and periodic alerts, and 
warnings issued by the India Meteorological Department (IMD). 
Thanks to the weather monitoring satellites, today we can 
track cyclones and predict their path, helping us reduce their 
impact on life and property. Several national and international 
organisations work together to monitor cyclone-related disasters. 
If you live in a cyclone-prone area, keep an emergency kit ready 
with essential items. During a cyclone, quickly move to a nearby 
designated cyclone shelter.
Let us wrap up!
Cool air rushes to occupy the low-pressure area.
Warm air rises, creating a low-pressure area.
Warm air rises, cools, and the water vapour condenses to 
form clouds.
Bigger water drops in the clouds fall to the ground as rain, 
hail, or snow.
Positive and negative charges are created in the clouds by 
strong winds blowing upwards and downwards.
Under certain weather conditions, storms may develop into 
cyclones.
When positive and negative charges meet, they cause 
lightning. Lightning may occur within a cloud, between 
clouds, or between a cloud and the ground.
Chapter 6.indd 93 6/28/2025 4:00:35 PM
Reprint 2026-27
