206 MATHEMATICS
ÆLatus rectum of hyperbola is a line segment perpendicular to the transverse
axis through any of the foci and whose end points lie on the hyperbola.
ÆLength of the latus rectum of the hyperbola :
2 2
2 2 1
x y
a b
− = is : 
2
2b
a
.
ÆThe eccentricity of a hyperbola is the ratio of the distances from the centre of
the hyperbola to one of the foci and to one of the vertices of the hyperbola.
Historical Note
Geometry is one of the most ancient branches of mathematics. The Greek
geometers investigated the properties of many curves that have theoretical and
practical importance. Euclid wrote his treatise on geometry around 300 B.C. He
was the first who organised the geometric figures based on certain axioms
suggested by physical considerations. Geometry as initially studied by the ancient
Indians and Greeks, who made essentially no use of the process of algebra. The
synthetic approach to the subject of geometry as given by Euclid and in
Sulbasutras, etc., was continued for some 1300 years. In the 200 B.C., Apollonius
wrote a book called ‘The Conic’ which was all about conic sections with many
important discoveries that have remained unsurpassed for eighteen centuries.
Modern analytic geometry is called ‘Cartesian’ after the name of Rene
Descartes (1596-1650) whose relevant ‘La Geometrie’ was published in 1637.
But the fundamental principle and method of analytical geometry were already
discovered by Pierre de Fermat (1601-1665). Unfortunately, Fermats treatise on
the subject, entitled Ad Locus Planos et So LIDOS Isagoge (Introduction to
Plane and Solid Loci) was published only posthumously in
1679. So, Descartes came to be regarded as the unique inventor of the analytical
geometry.
Isaac Barrow avoided using cartesian method. Newton used method of
undetermined coefficients to find equations of curves. He used several types of
coordinates including polar and bipolar. Leibnitz used the terms ‘abscissa’,
‘ordinate’ and ‘coordinate’. L’ Hospital (about 1700) wrote an important textbook
on analytical geometry.
Clairaut (1729) was the first to give the distance formula although in clumsy
form. He also gave the intercept form of the linear equation. Cramer (1750)
Reprint 2026-27
