104Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Al-Bīrūnī
Abū Rayḥān al-Bīrūnī, a Persian scholar from 
Khwārizm (in present-day Uzbekistan), was 
a mathematician, astronomer, geographer, 
historian and linguist all rolled into one. He 
travelled widely and wrote prolifically, both in 
Arabic and Persian, on nearly every branch of 
knowledge known in his time.
Around 1017, al-Bīrūnī accompanied Mahmūd 
of Ghazni on his campaign into India. He 
learned Sanskrit, read Indian texts and 
conversed with Indian scholars. The result 
was an encyclopaedic survey of Indian 
religion, philosophy, literature, geography, 
and sciences, in which he discussed Indian 
intellectual achievements as best he could, 
often comparing them with those of Greek 
and Islamic traditions. In mathematics and 
astronomy, al-Bīrūnī compiled what he 
could gather from the works of Āryabhaṭa, Varāhamihira and 
Brahmagupta, among others. In another work, he translated into 
Arabic Patanjali’s Yogasūtras, a classic text on advanced concepts 
and techniques of yoga.
At the same time, al-Bīrūnī noted the impact of Mahmūd’s 
military campaigns on India’s scientific traditions: “Mahmūd 
utterly ruined the prosperity of the country, and performed there 
wonderful feats, by which the Hindus became like atoms of dust 
scattered in all directions. ... This is the reason, too, why Indian 
sciences have retired far away from those parts of the country 
conquered by us, and have fled to places which our hand cannot 
yet reach; to Kashmir, Varanasi, and other places.”
Bhāskarāchārya
While the production and transmission of scientific knowledge 
did decline in north India a little later, they continued to 
flourish in other regions. Born in 1114, probably in present-day 
Maharashtra, Bhāskara II, better known as Bhāskarāchārya, was 
Fig. 4.6. A 1973 postage stamp 
issued by the former Soviet 
Union in memory of al-Bīrūnī 
(Uzbekistan was then part of the 
Soviet Union).
Chapter 4.indd 104 27-11-2025 11:10:29
Reprint 2026-27
