107Tapestry of the Past 4 – Turning Tides: 11th and 12th Centuries
Fig. 4.9. A coin issued from Lahore by Mahmūd, with 
one side in Arabic and the other in Sanskrit, praising 
Islam and Mahmūd as ‘nṛipati’ or king. 
at the Somnath temple, recorded, 
“The image was destroyed by the 
Prince Mahmūd. He ordered the 
upper part to be broken and the 
remainder to be transported to 
his residence, Ghazni. [A part of 
the image] lies before the door 
of the mosque of Ghazni, on 
which people rub their feet to 
clean them from dirt and wet.” 
Eastern India
While north India bore the brunt of the Ghaznavid raids, during 
the 11th century the scene in eastern India was very different. After 
the decline of the Pālas, the Sena dynasty (Fig. 4.4) emerged as the 
dominant power over much of Bengal, with their capital at Nādīya 
(now the Nadia district, which shares a border with Bangladesh). 
Their relations with neighbouring Kāmarūpa (Assam) and Kalinga 
(more or less present-day Odisha) seem to have alternated between 
friendly and conflictual. While their predecessors, the Pālas, 
patronised Buddhist institutions, the Senas promoted Hindu thought 
and literature, hosting poets such as Jayadeva, author of the famous 
Gītagovindam, which tells the story of Kṛiṣhṇa and Rādhā.
Let us follow the coast southward, into Kalinga where we encounter 
the Eastern Gangas (Fig. 4.4), who had matrimonial alliances with 
the Cholas (whom we will meet soon), yet also clashed with them a 
few times, and with other neighbours as well. Nevertheless, by the 
end of the 12th century the Eastern Gangas emerged as one of the 
most stable powers of eastern India, with their kingdom extending 
‘from the Gangā to the Godāvarī,’ as some of their inscriptions claim. 
This dynasty initiated the construction of the Jagannātha temple at 
Puri, and, in the mid-13th century, of the grand Sun temple at Konark. 
Further South 
Let us continue our journey southward. From the previous chapter, 
do you remember the Western Chālukyas (with their capital at 
Kalyāṇī or Kalyāṇa) and the Eastern Chālukyas (Fig. 4.10)? The 
Chapter 4.indd 107 27-11-2025 11:10:31
Reprint 2026-27
