114Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
called ‘Bhojtal’ remains near present-day Bhopal, while remains of 
earthen or stone embankments can still be seen further away. A local 
proverb (in Hindi) remembers the lake’s original size by declaring, 
“If there is a lake, it is Bhopal’s lake; all others are just ponds”! 
Bhoja also built the impressive Bhojeshwar Temple, which remains 
an architectural marvel even though it was never completed.
Bhoja was a generous patron who supported scholars and promoted 
Sanskrit literature. Under his patronage, arts and sciences flourished, 
so that his capital became a renowned centre of learning that 
attracted scholars, poets, and artists from across India.
Bhoja himself was a noted scholar and a prolific author who wrote on 
a wide range of subjects. His works include Samarāṅgaṇa Sūtradhāra
a long treatise on architecture, town planning, temple construction, 
sculpture and mechanical devices; treatises on governance and on 
Sanskrit poetics; a commentary on Patanjali’s Yogasūtras; and texts 
of medicine, among other texts attributed to him.
His reputation as a wise and learned ruler became legendary, 
inspiring numerous stories and folk tales.
A turning point: the Ghūrids in India
As we saw, Mahmūd of Ghazni was the first notable invader 
of India in the period we are looking at. After him, his 
Ghaznavid Empire was under attack from several sides in 
Afghanistan and beyond, and soon disintegrated. The chiefs of 
Ghūr (present-day Ghor), a mountainous region in Afghanistan 
to the west of Ghazni, were earlier vassals of the Ghaznavids, but 
now seized the opportunity to take control of Ghazni and build up
their power. 
Their leader Muhammad, now the sultan of Ghūr (and often 
called ‘Muhammad Ghūrī’ or ‘Muhammad of Ghor’), soon 
brought parts of Punjab and Sindh under his rule. His attempts 
to expand into Gujarat failed, as he was defeated in 1178 by the 
Chaulukya king Mūlarāja II at the foot of Mount Abu. In another 
version of this battle, it was Queen Nāīkīdevī, Mūlarāja’s mother, 
Chapter 4.indd 114 27-11-2025 11:10:38
Reprint 2026-27
