118Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
As Bakhtiyār Khiljī pushed further east into Bengal around 
1203–04, he caught the Sena ruler unaware at Nādīya, ending 
the Senas’ control over much of Bengal. For reasons that are 
not too clear, he then decided to attempt an expedition into 
Tibet. However, on his way through Kāmarūpa in 1205, he was 
confronted by the local ruler’s forces, who inflicted severe losses 
on his army. The local population is said to have destroyed food 
and fodder, in effect starving the invading army. Bakhtiyār 
escaped with only a handful of his men and returned to Bengal 
much weakened. 
Muhammad Ghurī was killed in 1206; the same year, Bakhtiyār 
Khiljī was assassinated, apparently by his own men. Their 
territory in north India remained under the control of 
Muhammad’s generals.
Governance, Trade and Cultural Life
We have seen much warfare in this period, which means that 
every powerful king needed to keep a sizable army. This involved 
considerable resources to employ the soldiers, supply them with 
weapons, maintain horses and elephants (and, in parts of north 
India, camels for transport of provisions). Powerful kingdoms 
therefore needed an efficient administration to collect 
tributes from vassals and taxes from the traders. The previous 
chapter described the main features of such administrations; 
there is no major change in this one, except with respect to 
Muhammad Ghūrī’s system, which was more centralised and 
granted temporary land assignments to officers in return for 
revenue collection and military service. This would be further 
developed during the period of the Delhi Sultanate, as we will 
see in Grade 8.
Despite the political disturbances we have seen, India’s trade 
with China and Southeast Asia kept growing during this period. 
Among other evidences, coins and pottery from those overseas 
regions have been found at many locations on India’s west coast, 
which had many seaports as well as shipyards manufacturing 
seafaring ships. While there was a brisk trade within India and 
beyond, supported by a few powerful guilds, the mainstay of 
Chapter 4.indd 118 27-11-2025 11:10:40
Reprint 2026-27
