LIMITS AND DERIVATIVES 221
In all these illustrations the value which the function should assume at a given
point x = a did not really depend on how is x tending to a. Note that there are essentially
two ways x could approach a number a either from left or from right, i.e., all the
values of x near a could be less than a or could be greater than a. This naturally leads
to two limits – the right hand limit and the left hand limit. Right hand limit of a
function f(x) is that value of f(x) which is dictated by the values of f(x) when x tends
to a from the right. Similarly, the left hand limit. To illustrate this, consider the function
( ) 1, 0
2, 0
x
f x
x
 ≤
= 
 >
Graph of this function is shown in the Fig 12.3. It is
clear that the value of f at 0 dictated by values of f(x) with
x ≤ 0 equals 1, i.e., the left hand limit of f (x) at 0 is
0
lim ( ) 1
x
f x
→
= .
Similarly, the value of f at 0 dictated by values of
f (x) with x > 0 equals 2, i.e., the right hand limit of f (x)
at 0 is
0
lim ( ) 2
x
f x
→ +
= .
In this case the right and left hand limits are different, and hence we say that the
limit of f (x) as x tends to zero does not exist (even though the function is defined at 0).
Summary
 We say lim
x a → – f(x) is the expected value of f at x = a given the values of f near
x to the left of a. This value is called the left hand limit of f at a.
We say lim ( )
x a
f x
→ +
 is the expected value of f at x = a given the values of
f near x to the right of a. This value is called the right hand limit of f(x) at a.
If the right and left hand limits coincide, we call that common value as the limit
of f(x) at x = a and denote it by lim
x a →
f(x).
Illustration 1 Consider the function f(x) = x + 10. We want to find the limit of this
function at x = 5. Let us compute the value of the function f(x) for x very near to 5.
Some of the points near and to the left of 5 are 4.9, 4.95, 4.99, 4.995. . ., etc. Values
of the function at these points are tabulated below. Similarly, the real number 5.001,
Fig 12.3
Reprint 2026-27
