Fractions
183
fractions was later introduced by the Moroccan mathematician 
Al-Hassar (in the 12th century). Over the next few centuries the
notation then spread to Europe and around the world.
Fractions had also been used in other cultures such as the ancient 
Egyptian and Babylonian civilisations, but they primarily used only 
fractional units, that is, fractions with a 1 in the numerator. More 
general fractions were expressed as sums of fractional units, now 
called ‘Egyptian fractions’. Writing numbers as the sum of fractional 
units, e.g., 19
24 = 1
2 + 1
6 + 1
8, can be quite an art and leads to beautiful 
puzzles. We will consider one such puzzle below. 
General fractions (where the numerator is not necessarily 1) 
were first introduced in India, along with their rules of arithmetic
operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and even 
division of fractions. The ancient Indian treatises called the ‘Sulba￾sutras’ shows that even during Vedic times, Indians had discovered 
the rules for operations with fractions. General rules and procedures 
for working with and computing with fractions were first codified
formally and in a modern form by Brahmagupta.
Brahmagupta’s methods for working with and computing with 
fractions are still what we use today. For example, Brahmagupta 
described how to add and subtract fractions as follows:
“By the multiplication of the numerator and the denominator 
of each of the fractions by the other denominators, the fractions 
are reduced to a common denominator. Then, in case of addition, 
the numerators (obtained after the above reduction) are added. 
In case of subtraction, their difference is taken.’’ (Brahmagupta, 
Brahmasphuṭasiddhānta, Verse 12.2, 628 CE)
The Indian concepts and methods involving fractions were
transmitted to Europe via the Arabs over the next few centuries and 
they came into general use in Europe in around the 17th century 
and then spread worldwide.
Chapter 7_Fractions.indd 183 13-08-2024 15:39:48
Reprint 2026-27
