I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round 99
In the new position, the thread is another chord on the circle. 
What is common to the first and second chords? They have the 
same length, equal to the length of the thread. What about the angle 
subtended by the second chord at the centre? It must surely be the 
same as the angle subtended by the first chord at the centre. We now 
explain why this is true.
Theorem 2: Equal chords of a circle subtend equal angles at the centre 
of the circle.
What does the theorem say? It talks of two chords of the circle with 
equal length. In geometry, it always helps to draw a figure! (See Fig. 5.9). 
AB and DE are chords of the same length. We need to explain why ∠ACB 
is equal to ∠DCE. What are we given? AB = DE. 
To explain why two angles in two different triangles are equal, we 
use congruence of triangles. If the angles which we want to show equal 
are corresponding angles, then our task would be done!
B
C
A
D
E
Fig. 5.9
Given: AB = DE.
To show: ∠ACB = ∠DCE. 
Why is this true? First, we see that 
CA = CB = r, the radius of the circle. 
Also, CD = CE = r. So, CA = CD and CB = CE.
But AB = DE is given! By the SSS congruence, 
∆CAB is congruent to ∆CDE. So, ∠ACB is 
equal to ∠DCE, i.e., the angles subtended 
at the centre are equal. 
Now suppose we have two chords that subtend equal angles at the 
centre. Are the chords equal? What does our intuition tell us? Let the 
chords be AB and DE. Let us use our imagination. Assume that B, A, E, 
and D are located clockwise on the circle as shown in Fig 5.10.
B
C
b = 54°
a = 54°
A
D
E
Fig. 5.10
Imagine you are standing at the centre C 
of a circle. Stretch your arms so that they are 
at a certain angle. Let your arms intersect the 
circle at A, B. The distance between your arm 
ends must be the length of chord AB. Now let 
the floor rotate magically. You start rotating 
(say clockwise) about C. Don’t change the 
angle your arms make! At some point your 
left arm meets point E. 
Chapter 5.indd 99 4/15/2026 3:01:56 PM
