I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round 115
inside the quadrilateral or outside? What is the best way of 
finding out?
*12. When two chords intersect, each of them is divided into two 
line segments. Show that if the intersecting chords are of equal 
length, then the line segments of one chord are equal to the 
corresponding line segments of the other chord.
*13. Draw a circle in which a chord of 6 cm length stands at a 
distance of 3 cm from the centre. 
(Hint: Is it a circumcircle of a suitable triangle?)
*14. Show that rectangle is the only parallelogram that can be 
inscribed in a circle.
*15. Show that if a rectangle is inscribed in a circle, then the point of 
intersection of its diagonals must lie at the centre of the circle.
*16. Consider all chords of a circle of a fixed length. What is the 
shape formed by the midpoints of all these chords?
*17. In a circle with centre O, chords AB and AC are congruent. Explain 
why this statement is true: “The centre of the circle lies on the 
angle bisector of ∠BAC”.
18. Two parallel chords of lengths 10 cm and 24 cm are on the same 
side of the centre of a circle. The distance between the chords is 
7 cm. Find the radius of the circle.
*19. A regular hexagon is inscribed in a circle of radius r. Find the 
length of the sides of the hexagon and the distance of each side 
from the centre of the circle.
20. A quadrilateral MNOP is inscribed in a circle. If MN is a 
diameter, what can you say about ∠MOP and ∠MNP? Explain 
your reasoning.
21. Let ABCD be a cyclic quadrilateral. Explain why the exterior 
angle at any vertex is equal to the interior opposite angle 
(e.g., ∠CDE = ∠ABC, where E is a point on the extension of 
side CD).
*22. “There is no chord of a circle that is longer than its diameter.” 
How do you justify this statement?
*23. Let A be any point within a given circle with centre O. Show that 
the shortest chord of the circle that passes through point A is the 
one that is perpendicular to OA.
Chapter 5.indd 115 4/15/2026 3:02:00 PM
