120
3. The containers which are used to store materials in shops and 
at home are usually transparent. Give your reasons for this.
4. State whether the statements given below are True [T] or 
False [F]. Correct the False statement(s).
 (i) Wood is translucent while glass is opaque. [ ]
 (ii) Aluminium foil has lustre while an eraser 
does not. [ ]
(iii) Sugar dissolves in water whereas sawdust 
does not. [ ]
(iv) An apple is a matter because it occupies no 
space and has mass. [ ]
5. We see chairs made up of various materials, such as wood, 
iron, plastic, bamboo, cement and stones. Following are 
some desirable properties of materials which can be used 
to make chairs. Which materials used to make chairs fulfil 
these properties the most?
 (i) Hardness (does not bend or shake on sitting even after 
long use).
 (ii) Lightweight (easy to lift or to take from one place to 
another).
(iii) Does not feel very cold when sitting during winters.
(iv) Can be cleaned regularly and made to look new even 
after long use.
6. You need to have containers for collection of: (i) food waste, 
(ii) broken glass and (iii) wastepaper. Which materials will 
you choose for containers of these types of waste? What 
properties of materials do you need to think of?
7. Air is all around us but does not hinder us from seeing each 
other. Whereas, if a wooden door comes in between, we 
cannot see each other. It is because air is 
and the wooden door is . Choose the most 
appropriate option:
 (i) transparent, opaque 
 (ii) translucent, transparent
(iii) opaque, translucent
(iv) transparent, translucent
8. Imagine you have two mysterious materials, X and Y. When 
you try to press material X, it feels rigid and does not change 
its shape easily. On the other hand, material Y easily changes 
its shape when you press it. Now, when you mix both 
materials in water, only material X dissolves completely, 
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6
Chapter 6.indd 120 10/4/2024 3:17:17 PM
Reprint 2026-27
