Bronze Age Civilisations Outside India
In Grade 6, you studied the major features of the Harappan/
Sindhu–Sarasvatī civilisation, such as the well-planned urban 
cities, water management and drainage systems, standard weights 
and measures, stone beads, inscribed seals, and the script. In this 
section, we will explore the main features of other Bronze Age 
civilisations that were contemporary with the Harappans. These 
three major civilisations were the Mesopotamian, Egyptian, and the 
Chinese civilisations.
It is important to note that four early world civilisations emerged 
in river plains—the Harappan civilisation along the Sindhu and 
Sarasvatī rivers, the Mesopotamian civilisation in the region around 
the Euphrates and Tigris rivers in West Asia, the Egyptian civilisation 
along the Nile River, and the Chinese civilisation in the Huang He 
basin in northern China. Geographically, Mesopotamia and the 
Indus and Ghaggar-Sarasvatī valleys are closer to each other. This 
proximity facilitated strong contacts and trade between the 
Mesopotamian and Harappan civilisations. The Egyptian and the 
Chinese civilisations, on the other hand, have little tangible evidence 
of their direct contact with the Sindhu–Sarasvatī civilisation.
THINK ABOUT IT
Why were rivers important in the growth of early civilisations?
Mesopotamian Civilisation
Although the four civilisations were contemporaneous, the earliest 
city-based civilisation emerged in Mesopotamia. Mesopotamia, 
meaning the “land in between,” is the Greek name for the land 
drained by the Euphrates and Tigris rivers in West Asia (Fig. 4.21). 
In modern times, this region includes mainly Iraq and Kuwait, with 
some parts of Turkey and southwestern Iran. The crescent-shaped 
foothills of the Zagros and Taurus, stretching from the Mediterranean 
in the west to the Persian Gulf in the east, are known as the ‘fertile 
crescent’, due to their high agricultural potential. 
While farming began in this region 12000 years before present, 
copper tools arrived here around 4500 BCE. The arrival of copper 
helped improve agriculture and other economic activities, such as 
craft production and trade. This eventually contributed to the broader 
dissemination of farming across the vast plains of the Euphrates and 
Tigris rivers. 
77
4 – Early Humans 
and Beginning of 
Civilisation
Chapter 4.indd 77 17-Jun-26 12:54:19 PM
