83
4 – Early Humans 
and Beginning of 
Civilisation
c. The Assyrians 
The Akkadian empire lost its supremacy around 2154 BCE to a new 
city-state, Assur, in northern Mesopotamia. The Assyrian civilisation 
that supplanted the Akkadians lasted till early 1700 BCE. In a short 
period, the Assyrian dominance spread across Mesopotamia and 
spread over the neighbouring regions in the west and south. 
d. The Babylonians
While the Assyrians were dominant in the north, a new city￾state, Babylonia, gained dominance in central Mesopotamia from 
1900 BCE onwards. Babylonia’s glory started with the ascendance 
of Hammurabi in 1792 BCE, who conquered the neighbouring 
regions and expanded the small city-state into a large empire. The 
most significant contribution of Hammurabi was the compilation of 
rules and regulations for civil and social conduct known as the Code 
of Hammurabi throughout his empire. It served as a foundational 
model for many future legal systems. 
By the end of 1400 BCE, the Babylonians had 
lost their earlier prominence due to repeated 
attacks by the Hittites and other rising 
powers, who had gained an advantage by 
mastering new technologies and adopting 
more efficient ways of using natural 
resources. This, along with increasing 
environmental degradation, pressure on 
agricultural lands, and internal political and 
economic problems, gradually weakened 
Babylonian control. As a result, they were 
unable to maintain their dominance, and 
new powers emerged in West Asia.
Hittites: 
The Hittites were 
Indo-European 
people who 
established a 
powerful empire 
in Anatolia 
(modern-day 
Turkey) around 
the second 
millennium BCE.
Fig. 4.27. Top part of a stone stele showing King 
Hammurabi receiving the law from Shamash, 
the Babylonian god of justice. Note the law 
codes inscribed in cuneiform below the relief.
Egyptian Civilisation
Egyptian civilisation is one of the earliest civilisations of the world, 
known for its rich historical records and lasting influence on other 
civilisations. It is interesting to note that Egypt was known to the 
Greeks and Romans, and Greek writers like Herodotus visited and 
wrote about Egypt as early as the 5th century BCE. A 19th century 
collection of works titled de L’Egypte also provides fascinating details 
about its history. 
Chapter 4.indd 83 17-Jun-26 12:54:55 PM
