92
Understanding Society: 
India and Beyond 
Grade 9 – Part 1
THINK ABOUT IT 
What could have been the other reasons for building the Great 
Wall of China? Explore and share your findings on the Great Wall 
through a model or presentation.
Silk was known to the Chinese from the Neolithic period (4000–3000 
BCE) onwards and became an important craft during the Bronze 
Age. However, around the 2nd century BCE, during the time of the 
Han dynasty, silk became a major item of external trade, so much so 
that the entire route on which it was traded came to be known as the 
‘Silk Route’. 
LET’S RECALL
Do you remember studying about the Silk Route in Grade 7? How 
was India connected with it? Can you recollect China’s contact with 
India with reference to Buddhism that you studied in Grade 7?
By 1500 BCE, the Chinese Bronze Age society was highly stratified 
with the ruling class, nobles, and aristocrats at the top, followed by 
farmers and labourers, which laid the foundation of Chinese social 
hierarchical structure that evolved later. 
DON’T MISS OUT
A metal-based medium of exchange appeared during the Zhou 
dynasty, and a money economy developed by the 5th century BCE. 
China was also the first country to introduce paper currency to 
the world, and the first to develop civil services through public 
examination.
We have seen how major Bronze Age civilisations of the world 
emerged independently in the fertile river plains. Harnessing 
agricultural productivity and the incorporation of new resources 
helped economic growth, leading to the emergence of urban cities 
in all these major centres of civilisation. They developed social 
and administrative systems independently to ensure and enhance 
economic growth. The development of writing systems enabled 
early societies to record economic transactions and social activities, 
and over time, it also led to the composition of literary and creative 
texts. Thus, many of our cultural ethos have their roots in the Bronze 
Age civilisations.
Chapter 4.indd 92 17-Jun-26 12:55:29 PM
