Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
44
A piece of coal or a lump of sulfur does not show this behaviour. 
They break into pieces and are said to be brittle. On the other 
hand, wood neither gets fl attened into a sheet nor breaks into 
pieces. Therefore, wood is neither malleable nor brittle. 
HOLISTIC LENS
The impact of iron on the progress of civilisation of India
In the Grade 6 Social Science textbook Exploring Society India and 
Beyond, you learnt about the Harappans. They knew how to use 
metals like copper and gold. They used these metals to make various 
objects, from utensils to jewellery. However, you would hardly fi nd 
any evidence of the Harappans using a very prominent metal iron, 
which you see a lot around you today. This is because it took a long 
time before iron was used in day-to-day activities.
 However, once the use of iron gained prominence in the times that 
followed, it contributed signifi cantly to the progress of civilisation in 
India. For instance, due to its strength, agricultural tools like ploughs 
made from iron were much superior to those used previously. 
 What could be the potential reason that it is generally considered 
that copper was discovered earlier as compared to iron?
which you see a lot around you today. This is because it took a long 
time before iron was used in day-to-day activities.
 However, once the use of iron gained prominence in the times that 
followed, it contributed signifi cantly to the progress of civilisation in 
India. For instance, due to its strength, agricultural tools like ploughs 
made from iron were much superior to those used previously. 
 What could be the potential reason that it is generally considered 
that copper was discovered earlier as compared to iron?
4.1.2 Ductility
Where do you fi nd the use of metal wires? 
You might have seen wires of metals like copper or aluminium 
in electrical fi ttings. Some ornaments, like bangles, necklaces, 
earrings, etc., are also made from metal wires. Metal wires play 
important functions in a variety of stringed musical instruments, 
such as veena, sitar, violin, and guitar.
This property of materials by which they can be drawn into 
wires is called ductility.
This property of ductility is mainly possessed by metals.
Gold is so ductile 
that one gram of it 
can be drawn into a 
2 kilometre-long wire! 
The ductile nature of 
metals enables for 
the creation of 
this tea strainer 
with metal wire.
Chapter 4.indd 44 4/3/2025 4:52:11 PM
Reprint 2026-27
