The World of Metals and Non-metals
53
You would observe that it is acidic in 
nature (Fig. 4.7d). 
On burning sulfur in air (oxygen), 
sulfur dioxide gas is formed. On dissolving 
sulfur dioxide gas in water, sulfurous acid 
is formed.
Does sulfur behave in water the same 
way metals do?
Activity 4.8: Let us explore
 Take some sulfur powder in a glass tumbler. 
 Add a small amount of water to it.
 What do you observe?
You may have noticed that there is no reaction when sulfur is 
placed in water. 
Substances like sulfur and phosphorus behave diff erently 
with air and water than metals. Phosphorus is stored in water 
as it catches fi re when exposed to atmospheric air. These 
substances are usually soft and dull in appearance. They are 
neither malleable nor ductile, and they are not sonorous. They 
are also poor conductors of heat and electricity. These are called 
non-metals. Their oxides are acidic in nature. 
Some other non-metals are oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon, 
etc. These must not be confused with materials such as plastic, 
glass, wood, rubber, and paper. These materials are not classifi ed 
as metals or non-metals because they are not elements. 
Metals and non-metals are sub-categories of 
substances called elements. An element is a substance 
that cannot be broken down into simpler substances. 
Presently 118 elements are known. These 
elements are the basic building blocks of all matter. 
Some are naturally occurring, while others are 
artifi cially made in the laboratory, and do not exist 
in nature. You will study more about elements in 
higher grades.
Metals and non-metals are sub-categories of 
substances called elements. An element is a substance 
that cannot be broken down into simpler substances. 
Presently 118 elements are known. These 
elements are the basic building blocks of all matter. 
Some are naturally occurring, while others are 
artifi cially made in the laboratory, and do not exist 
DIVE
EEPER
4.5 Are Non-metals Essential in 
Everyday Life?
You often observe many metals in your day-to-day lives because 
of their distinct properties, such as their lustrous nature, heat 
Red litmus 
paper
Blue litmus 
paper
Fig. 4.7(d): Testing of solution with 
litmus papers
Watch glass
Chapter 4.indd 53 4/3/2025 4:52:18 PM
Reprint 2026-27
