Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
54
and electrical conductivity, and high strength. However, this 
should not give an impression in your mind that non-metals are 
not important in our lives. 
We breathe in oxygen, which is a non-metal, and without it, 
we would not be able to survive. Can you think of any other uses 
of oxygen?
Carbon is essential in everyday life because it is the building 
block of all life forms. It is a key component of proteins, fats, and 
carbohydrates, which are necessary for growth and energy. 
Nitrogen is used in the manufacturing of fertilisers and other 
chemicals. It is an essential nutrient for the growth of plants. 
Chlorine is a non-metal commonly used in water purifi cation. 
A solution of iodine, a non-metal, is applied on wounds as an 
antiseptic. 
SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
Do you know that many metals and their alloys (mixtures of two or 
more metals or a metal and a non-metal) are important for daily use as 
utensils and tools. These are also important for modern technologies 
and essential in almost every industry. Some special metals are also 
used in atomic energy (such as zirconium), aerospace (titanium), etc. 
In India, many metals, especially iron and aluminium, are recycled to 
minimise waste and contribute to sustainability. 
In a Nutshell
 Metals and non-metals are diff erentiated based on their 
properties.
 Generally, metals are lustrous, whereas most non-metals are 
non-lustrous.
 Metals are generally malleable and ductile, while non-metals 
do not have these properties.
 Metals are good conductors of heat and electricity, but 
non-metals are generally poor conductors.
 Metals react with oxygen to produce metal oxides which are 
basic in nature.
 Non-metals react with oxygen to produce oxides which are 
acidic in nature.
 Generally, non-metals do not react with water.
 Metal objects get damaged when exposed to moist air, and 
the process is known as corrosion.
 Metals and non-metals have wide applications in 
everyday life.
Chapter 4.indd 54 4/3/2025 4:52:19 PM
Reprint 2026-27
