210 MATHEMATICS
accordingly. Thus, to each point P in the space there corresponds an ordered triplet
(x, y, z) of real numbers.
Conversely, given any triplet (x, y, z), we would first fix the point L on the x-axis
corresponding to x, then locate the point M in the XY-plane such that (x, y) are the
coordinates of the point M in the XY-plane. Note that LM is perpendicular to the
x-axis or is parallel to the y-axis. Having reached the point M, we draw a perpendicular
MP to the XY-plane and locate on it the point P corresponding to z. The point P so
obtained has then the coordinates (x, y, z). Thus, there is a one to one correspondence
between the points in space and ordered triplet (x, y, z) of real numbers.
Alternatively, through the point P in the
space, we draw three planes parallel to the
coordinate planes, meeting the x-axis, y-axis
and z-axis in the points A, B and C, respectively
(Fig 11.3). Let OA = x, OB = y and OC = z.
Then, the point P will have the coordinates x, y
and z and we write P (x, y, z). Conversely, given
x, y and z, we locate the three points A, B and
C on the three coordinate axes. Through the
points A, B and C we draw planes parallel to
the YZ-plane, ZX-plane and XY-plane,
respectively. The point of interesection of these three planes, namely, ADPF, BDPE
and CEPF is obviously the point P, corresponding to the ordered triplet (x, y, z). We
observe that if P (x, y, z) is any point in the space, then x, y and z are perpendicular
distances from YZ, ZX and XY planes, respectively.
ANote The coordinates of the origin O are (0,0,0). The coordinates of any point
on the x-axis will be as (x,0,0) and the coordinates of any point in the YZ-plane will
be as (0, y, z).
Remark The sign of the coordinates of a point determine the octant in which the
point lies. The following table shows the signs of the coordinates in eight octants.
Table 11.1
Fig 11.3
I II III IV V VI VII VIII
x + – – + + – – +
y + + – – + + – –
z + + + + – – – –
Octants
Coordinates
Reprint 2026-27
