2Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
In 1984, Rakesh Sharma, the first Indian astronaut to go into 
space, spoke with the then Prime Minister of India, Indira 
Gandhi. When she asked him, “How does India look from 
space?”, he replied, “Sāre jahān se achchha” — better than the 
whole world. (This is the title of a well-known poem of the early 
20th century.)
LET’S EXPLORE
Look at the map of India at the end of this book. What are 
you able to observe? Recall your lesson on different types 
of landforms—mountains, plains and plateaus. Which 
landforms can you identify on the map? What do the different 
colours on the map mean? (Hint: The legend on the map shows 
the heights of each area.)
As you go through this chapter, remember to refer periodically 
to the physical map. 
India is the seventh-largest country in the world, and a part of 
Asia. Along with its neighbours — Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, 
Bhutan, Sri Lanka, and Myanmar — it forms the region known 
as the Indian Subcontinent (subcontinent, since it is part of 
the continent of Asia). Often, for the purpose of discussion, we 
refer to five regions — the great mountain zone, the plains of the 
Ganga and the Indus, the desert region, the southern peninsula, 
and the islands. In this chapter, we will ‘fly’ over these zones, 
providing you with a bird’s-eye view of these features and 
offering glimpses of what things look like in close-up at some of 
these places. It would be difficult to go into all the details at this 
stage since, as you will soon see, India is large and diverse. 
The Himalayan Mountain range stands as a natural barrier in 
the north, while the Thar Desert and the Arabian Sea mark its 
western limits. To the south, the Indian Ocean and to the east, 
the Bay of Bengal form a natural boundary. These geographical 
features create a separation between India and the rest of the 
continent and have played a crucial role in shaping India’s 
climate, culture, and history. 
Chapter 1.indd 2 08-04-2025 11:30:23
Reprint 2026-27
