207Economic Life Around Us 8 – Banks and the Magic of Finance
discouraged a majority of people from using banking services, 
leading to heavy reliance on cash due to which billions of rupees 
were used every day without a record. 
This system changed in 2016 when the National Payments 
Corporation of India (NPCI) launched UPI, a fast and secure 
digital payment system that enables transfer of funds. See Fig. 
8.18 to learn more about this with an example. 
Did you notice how effortlessly UPI allowed a digital transaction 
between Kumar and Piyush? You may remember that during 
the COVID-19 pandemic, maintaining social distancing became 
essential to prevent the spread of infection. During this period, 
UPI gained popularity for supporting cashless transactions. 
Moreover, its user-friendly design in multiple languages makes 
it accessible to everyone. 
 THINK ABOUT IT
India’s digital payment revolution is expanding rapidly across 
borders. Nepal was the first country to adopt India’s UPI as a 
payment platform in 2022. Today, nations such as the United 
Arab Emirates, France, Sri Lanka, Bhutan, Mauritius and so 
on have adopted it, and more countries are increasingly 
showing interest. This instant, efficient and secure system is 
truly India’s gift to the world of payment systems! 
Stock Market 
Previously, you learned about various markets like retail, 
wholesale, online and so on. Imagine the stock market like a 
giant online book store — but instead of buying books — people 
buy and sell shares. 
Suppose you own a small restaurant and wish to expand it 
with a variety of cuisines. However, if you do not have enough 
money, you can borrow it from friends in exchange for a share 
of profits, for which they become part-owners of your business. 
Similarly, a ‘share’ is a part-ownership in a company. So, when 
you buy a share of a company, you become a part-owner of that 
Share: 
A share is 
a unit of 
ownership in 
a company, 
representing a 
portion of its 
capital stock.
Chapter 8.indd 207 08-05-2026 11.51.08 AM
Reprint 2026-27
