32Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
DON’T MISS OUT
The Indian Ocean is the third-largest ocean in the world and 
is a busy route where half of the world’s container ships, one 
third of the bulk cargo, and two-thirds of the world’s oil are 
transported. This ocean connects many countries, which are 
home to around 2.7 billion people.
With a long coastline of approximately 11,100 km, India holds a 
unique maritime position. Her peninsular shape extends deep 
into the Indian Ocean — a location that provides India with 
access to important sea routes, making her a vital link between 
Southeast Asia, West Asia, and Africa. This has allowed India to 
play a key role in trade and regional cooperation. India’s ports 
serve as gateways for imports and exports, and her central 
position helps in providing timely humanitarian aid and disaster 
relief in the region. 
Such involvement is called regionalism and helps create peace, 
stability, and shared progress. It teaches us that being good 
neighbours is not just about borders, but also about working 
together for the benefit of everyone in the region. See the map in 
Fig. 2.2 to get a sense of the dense networks of land and sea routes 
connecting India with many regions in this part of the world.
India and Her Land-based Neighbours
 India and her largest neighbour
Since 1950, India and China, two of Asia’s largest and most 
influential nations, have shared a long and strategic relation￾ship shaped by history, geography, culture, trade, and politics. 
Separated by the Himalayas, their border stretches (from 
east to west) across the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, 
Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, and the Union Territory of 
Ladakh.
Culturally, Buddhism is a powerful link between the two countries. 
Originating in India, it reached China around the 1st century CE 
via trade and pilgrimage routes. A few centuries later, Chinese 
monks like Faxian and Xuanzang travelled to Indian centres of 
Chapter 2.indd 32 11/27/2025 12:15:37 PM
Reprint 2026-27
