35India and the World: Land and the People 2 – India and Her Neighbours
Before the 1947 Partition — a legacy of the colonial era that 
continues to shape the present — Pakistan was a part of India. 
Let us note for now that Pakistan was founded on a religious 
basis, unlike India; this will be explored further in Grade 8.
Suffice to say that these nations share one of the most complex 
relationships in South Asia. Since the Partition, several military 
conflicts and wars, including wars in 1948, 1965 and 1971, and 
full-scale conflicts like the Kargil War in 1999, have defined 
an ongoing tension. In particular, frequent terrorist attacks 
launched against India with the support of the Pakistan army 
have prevented normal relations between the two countries.
The border between the two nations stretches across the Indian 
states of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Punjab, and the union territories 
of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (Fig. 2.5). It is not just a 
geographical line, but also a symbol of shared heritage as well 
as a tragically divided history.
This tumultuous journey has also been marked by attempts at 
peace, such as periods of trade and the opening of pilgrimage 
routes for Hindu or Sikh pilgrims — religious and cultural 
landmarks of a shared past that lives on. The Katas Raj temple 
complex in Pakistan’s Punjab is one such example, linked to the 
Mahābhārata and containing a sacred pond. Other examples 
include several ancient Hindu, Buddhist, and Sikh shrines, such 
as the Hinglaj Mata Mandir in Balochistan. Besides, languages, 
cuisines, music, and festivals continue to bridge the border. 
 DON’T MISS OUT
The Kartarpur Corridor is a visa-free border crossing between 
India and Pakistan, created to allow Indian pilgrims to visit 
the Gurdwara Darbar Sahib in Kartarpur, Pakistan (Fig. 2.6). 
Pilgrims using the corridor do not need a visa, only a permit, 
which makes it easier for thousands of people to visit the 
gurdwara. This gurdwara holds great religious significance as 
it is the final resting place of Guru Nānak Dev, the founder of 
Sikhism, who spent the last 18 years of his life there.
Chapter 2.indd 35 11/27/2025 12:15:40 PM
Reprint 2026-27
