Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
108
FASCINATING FACTS
In ancient India, time was measured using both shadows and water 
clocks. The earliest reference to shadow-based time measurement 
appears in the Arthasastra by Kautilya (was composed and revised 
between the second century BCE – third century CE). An accurate 
expression for time in terms of the shadow of a vertical stick was 
given by Varahamihira around 530 CE. The water clock with water 
fl owing out was described in the Arthasastra, Sardulakarnavadana, 
and some other texts (early CE centuries). These clocks were not very 
accurate because as water levels dropped, the fl ow rate decreased. 
This led to the development of the sinking bowl water clock 
(Fig. 8.2b), or Ghatika-yantra, fi rst mentioned by Aryabhata, and then 
in several astronomical texts later. Time was measured constantly 
with Ghatika-yantra at Buddhist monasteries, royal palaces, town 
squares, and each time the bowl sank, it was announced by drums, 
conch shells, or striking a gong. Though the Ghatika-yantra was 
progressively replaced by pendulum clocks in the late nineteenth 
century, it continued to be used at the religious places for rituals.
, fi rst mentioned by Aryabhata, and then 
in several astronomical texts later. Time was measured constantly 
 at Buddhist monasteries, royal palaces, town 
squares, and each time the bowl sank, it was announced by drums, 
 was 
progressively replaced by pendulum clocks in the late nineteenth 
Fig. 8.6: Huygens’ 
Pendulum clock
Pendulum
As human civilisation advanced, and 
as people began to travel long distances, 
the measurement of time became very 
critical. This led to the development of 
increasingly better mechanical devices 
for the measurement of time, driven 
by weights, gears, and springs from the 
fourteenth century onwards. However, 
the invention of the pendulum clock 
in the seventeenth century marked 
a major breakthrough in mechanical 
timekeeping.
KNOW A SCIENTIST
The pendulum clock was invented in 1656 and patented in 1657 by 
Christiaan Huygens (1629 –1695). He was inspired by the investigations 
of pendulums by Galileo Galilei (1564 –1642). It is said that once while 
sitting in a church, Galileo’s attention was drawn to a lamp suspended 
from the ceiling, which was swinging back and forth. Using his pulse 
to measure time, Galileo found that the lamp took the same time for 
each swing. After experimenting with diff erent pendulums, Galileo 
concluded that the time taken to complete one oscillation was always 
the same for a pendulum of a given length. 
Christiaan Huygens (1629 –1695). He was inspired by the investigations 
of pendulums by Galileo Galilei (1564 –1642). It is said that once while 
sitting in a church, Galileo’s attention was drawn to a lamp suspended 
from the ceiling, which was swinging back and forth. Using his pulse 
to measure time, Galileo found that the lamp took the same time for 
each swing. After experimenting with diff erent pendulums, Galileo 
concluded that the time taken to complete one oscillation was always 
the same for a pendulum of a given length. 
Chapter 8.indd 108 4/3/2025 4:54:34 PM
Reprint 2026-27
