Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
110
 Gently hold the bob, move it slightly to one side and release 
it. Take care not to push the bob while releasing it and that 
the string is taut. Is your pendulum now oscillating?
 Using a watch, measure the time it takes for the pendulum 
to complete 10 oscillations. Record the time in Table 8.1.
 Repeat this activity 3–4 times.
 Divide the time taken for 10 oscillations by 10 to calculate
the time period of your pendulum. Note it down in Table 8.1. 
Table 8.1 Time period of a simple pendulum
Length of the string = 100 cm
S.No. Time taken for 10 oscillations 
(seconds)
1.
2.
3.
Time period 
(seconds)
Is the time period of your pendulum almost the same every 
time? What do you conclude from this observation? The time 
period of the pendulum is almost the same every time.
THINK LIKE A SCIENTIST!
You just did an important historical experiment which was fi rst done 
by Galileo, except you used a watch to measure time in place of your 
pulse beat. Suppose you were Galileo experimenting with pendulums, 
what all would you investigate? What questions could you ask? Would 
all pendulums have the same time period? How would you test this? 
Repeat Activity 8.2 using the same bob but with pendulums of two 
or three diff erent lengths. Does the time period change? If so, how does 
the length aff ect it? If changing the length infl uences the time period, 
does the bob’s mass also matter? Test this by repeating Activity 8.2 
with a fi xed pendulum length but with bobs of diff erent mass. Do you 
observe any change?
The time period of a simple pendulum depends on its length but 
not on the bob’s mass. All pendulums of the same length have the same 
time period at a given location.
or three diff erent lengths. Does the time period change? If so, how does 
the length aff ect it? If changing the length infl uences the time period, 
does the bob’s mass also matter? Test this by repeating Activity 8.2 
with a fi xed pendulum length but with bobs of diff erent mass. Do you 
observe any change?
not on the bob’s mass. All pendulums of the same length have the same 
time period at a given location.
The time period of a simple pendulum of a given length is 
constant at a place. This property is used in the measurement of 
time. 
Chapter 8.indd 110 4/3/2025 4:54:36 PM
Reprint 2026-27
