STATISTICS 259
13.2 Measures of Dispersion
The dispersion or scatter in a data is measured on the basis of the observations and the
types of the measure of central tendency, used there. There are following measures of
dispersion:
(i) Range, (ii) Quartile deviation, (iii) Mean deviation, (iv) Standard deviation.
In this Chapter, we shall study all of these measures of dispersion except the
quartile deviation.
13.3 Range
Recall that, in the example of runs scored by two batsmen A and B, we had some idea
of variability in the scores on the basis of minimum and maximum runs in each series.
To obtain a single number for this, we find the difference of maximum and minimum
values of each series. This difference is called the ‘Range’ of the data.
In case of batsman A, Range = 117 – 0 = 117 and for batsman B, Range = 60 – 46 = 14.
Clearly, Range of A > Range of B. Therefore, the scores are scattered or dispersed in
case of A while for B these are close to each other.
Thus, Range of a series = Maximum value – Minimum value.
The range of data gives us a rough idea of variability or scatter but does not tell
about the dispersion of the data from a measure of central tendency. For this purpose,
we need some other measure of variability. Clearly, such measure must depend upon
the difference (or deviation) of the values from the central tendency.
The important measures of dispersion, which depend upon the deviations of the
observations from a central tendency are mean deviation and standard deviation. Let
us discuss them in detail.
13.4 Mean Deviation
Recall that the deviation of an observation x from a fixed value ‘a’ is the difference
x – a. In order to find the dispersion of values of x from a central value ‘a’ , we find the
deviations about a. An absolute measure of dispersion is the mean of these deviations.
To find the mean, we must obtain the sum of the deviations. But, we know that a
measure of central tendency lies between the maximum and the minimum values of
the set of observations. Therefore, some of the deviations will be negative and some
positive. Thus, the sum of deviations may vanish. Moreover, the sum of the deviations
from mean ( x ) is zero.
Also Mean of deviations 
Sum of deviations 0 0
Number of observations n
= = =
Thus, finding the mean of deviations about mean is not of any use for us, as far
as the measure of dispersion is concerned.
Reprint 2026-27
