A freely suspended magnet comes to rest along the 
north-south direction. The end of the magnet that points 
towards north direction is called the North-seeking pole or 
the North pole of the magnet. The other end that points 
towards the South direction is called the South-seeking 
pole or the South pole of the magnet. A freely suspended 
magnet rests along the north-south direction because our 
Earth itself behaves like a giant magnet.
Repeat this activity with a small iron bar in place of 
the bar magnet. What do you observe? Does it always rest 
along north-south direction? It does not. It can rest along 
any direction. This implies that only magnets rest along 
north-south direction. This activity provides us with a way 
to test whether a piece of metal is a magnet or not. 
The property of a freely suspended magnet to always rest 
along the north-south direction is used to find directions. 
Based on this, a small device called a magnetic compass was 
developed in olden days for finding directions. It 
has a magnet in the shape of a needle which can 
rotate freely (Fig. 4.6). The needle of a magnetic 
compass indicates the north-south direction.
The compass is kept at the place where we 
wish to know the directions. After some time, the 
needle comes to rest in the north-south direction. 
The compass box is then gently rotated until the 
north and south marked on the dial are aligned 
with the needle. Now all directions at that place 
are as indicated on the dial.
A magnetic compass is usually a small circular box 
with a transparent cover on it, as shown in Fig. 4.6. 
The magnet, in the shape of a needle, is mounted 
on a pin standing on the bottom of the box. This 
needle is balanced on the pin in such a 
manner that it can move around this point 
easily, that is, it can rotate freely. The end of 
the needle which rests in the North direction 
is usually painted red. Below the needle, 
there is a dial with directions marked on it. 
How can we 
make our 
own magnetic 
compass?
More to 
know!
Fig. 4.6: A magnetic 
compass
Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6
66
Chapter 4.indd 66 10/4/2024 3:20:26 PM
Reprint 2026-27
