Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 
88
Hence, no matter what the angles between the diagonals are, if the 
diagonals are equal and they bisect each other, then the angles of the 
quadrilateral formed are 90° each, and the opposite sides are equal. 
Thus, the quadrilateral is a rectangle.
Now we know how the wooden strips have to be put together to form 
the vertices of a rectangle! They should be equal and connected at their 
midpoints.
This method is actually used in practice to 
make rectangles. Carpenters in Europe use 
this method to get a rectangular frame. It is 
also known that farmers in Mozambique, 
a country in Africa, use this method while 
constructing houses to get the base of the 
house in a rectangular shape. 
The Process of Finding Properties
As we have been seeing from lower grades, 
properties of geometric objects such as parallel 
lines, angles, and triangles can be deduced through geometric reasoning. 
We will continue to deduce properties of special types of quadrilaterals 
in this chapter. 
Once you have deduced a property of a quadrilateral, it is good to verify 
it with a real-world quadrilateral, either the quadrilateral constructed 
on paper or simply a surface having the shape of the quadrilateral. 
If you are not able to figure out the property using deduction, you 
could experiment by taking real-world quadrilaterals and observing the 
property through measurement. Note that these observations give 
useful insights about the property, but with them, we can only form a 
conjecture, that is, a statement about which we are highly confident, 
but not yet sure if it always holds true. For example, constructing a 
few rectangles and observing through measurement that their diagonals 
bisect each other does not necessarily mean that this will always be the 
case—can we be sure that the 1000th rectangle we construct will also 
have this property? The only way we can be sure of this property is by 
justifying or proving the statement, just as we did in Deduction 2.
A
B
D
A C
B
D
A O C O C O
4 cm 4 cm 4 cm 4 cm 4 cm 4 cm
4 cm
4 cm
4 cm
4 cm
Note to the Teacher: Gently encourage students to deduce or justify properties. 
Whenever students face challenges in doing it, encourage them to experiment and 
observe, and use their intuition to figure out the properties.
Chapter 4 Quadrilaterals 06-07-2025.indd 88 7/10/2025 3:19:33 PM
Reprint 2026-27
