Chapter 9 — The Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, and Solutions 135
You must have taken an Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS) at some 
time in your life. ORS is used to treat dehydration by keeping 
your body hydrated. You have learnt to prepare ORS at home in 
Curiosity, Grade 6. You may have wondered why every sip of 
your homemade ORS tastes the same, no matter how much you 
drink. Why does it not taste salty in one sip and sweet in another? 
This is because when you add sugar and salt to water, they 
form a mixture in which the components are evenly distributed 
throughout. 
Can you predict whether this mixture is uniform or 
not (Fig. 9.1)? What happens when chalk powder is mixed 
with water—does it form a uniform mixture? 
When salt and sugar are mixed with water, a uniform
mixture is formed, whereas when chalk powder or sand, or 
sawdust is mixed with water, the components are not evenly 
distributed. Such mixtures are known as non-uniform 
mixtures (Fig. 9.2a and 9.2b).
Let us explore the science of mixing things together.
9.1 What Are Solute, Solvent, and Solution?
A uniform mixture, such as that of salt 
or sugar, and water, is called a solution. 
Whenever a solid is mixed with a liquid 
to form a solution, the solid component 
is called the solute, and the liquid 
component is called the solvent. The 
solute dissolves in the solvent to form a 
solution (Fig. 9.3).
Solute + Solvent Solution
When a solution is formed by mixing 
two liquids, it is not always clear which 
substance is dissolving the other. In such 
cases, the substance present in smaller 
amount is called the solute, while the one 
in larger amount is called the solvent.
Fig. 9.1: Mixture of 
sugar, salt, and water
Fig. 9.2: Mixture of (a) Sand and 
water; (b) Sawdust and water
We know air is a mixture. 
Would a mixture of gases 
also be considered a 
solution?
Fig. 9.3: Magnified schematic picture of a 
solute evenly distributed in a solvent
Solute
Solvent
Chapter 9.indd 135 11-Sep-25 9:36:45 AM
Reprint 2026-27
