Chapter 9 — The Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, and Solutions 137
You might have observed that, initially, the salt completely 
dissolves in the water, forming a solution. After adding a few 
more spoons of salt, a stage comes when the added salt does not 
dissolve completely and the undissolved salt settles at the bottom. 
This indicates that the water can no longer dissolve any more salt 
because it has reached its limit. The solution in which more solute 
can be dissolved at a given temperature, is called an unsaturated 
solution (Fig. 9.5). However, when the solute stops dissolving and 
begins to settle at the bottom, the solution is called a saturated 
solution at that particular temperature (Fig. 9.6).
The amount of solute present in a fixed quantity of solution 
(or solvent) is termed as its concentration. Depending upon the 
amount of solute present in a fixed quantity of solution, it can be 
called a dilute solution (less amount of solute) or a concentrated
solution (more amount of solute). Dilute and concentrated are 
relative terms. 
So, one can say in Activity 9.1, the solution obtained by 
dissolving one spoon of salt is dilute as compared to that obtained 
by dissolving two or more spoons of salt. 
Can you now reflect — which solution is more concentrated; 
2 spoons of salt in 100 mL of water or 4 spoons of salt in 50 mL 
of water?
We can say that the maximum amount of solute that dissolves 
in a fixed quantity of the solvent is called its solubility. 
Does temperature affect the solubility of a solute?
Let us find out!
9.2.1 How does temperature affect the solubility of a 
solute?
Activity 9.2: Let us experiment 
(Demonstration activity)
z Take about 50 mL of water in a glass beaker and measure its 
temperature using a laboratory thermometer, say 20 °C.
z Add a spoonful of baking soda (sodium 
hydrogen carbonate) to the water and 
stir until it dissolves. Continue adding 
small amounts of baking soda while 
stirring, till some solid baking soda is 
left undissolved at the bottom of the 
beaker.
Safety first
Be careful while using the 
heating device.
Fig. 9.5: Unsaturated 
solution
Fig. 9.6: Saturated 
solution
Solution
Undissolved 
salt
Chapter 9.indd 137 11-Sep-25 9:40:29 AM
Reprint 2026-27
