Chapter 9 — The Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, and Solutions
138
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
z Now, heat the contents to 50 °C while 
stirring (Fig. 9.7). 
z What happens to the undissolved baking 
soda? 
z You will observe that it has dissolved.
z Continue adding more baking soda while 
stirring at this temperature until some 
solid baking soda remains undissolved.
z Again, heat the contents further to 70 °C 
while continuing to stir. What do you 
observe?
z The undissolved baking soda dissolves.
z What do you infer from this experiment? 
Water at 70 °C dissolves more baking soda 
than water at 50 °C. The amount of baking 
soda dissolved in water at 20 °C is even lesser.
It has been found that for most of 
the substances, the solubility increases with an increase in 
temperature. We can also say that a saturated solution at a 
particular temperature behaves as an unsaturated solution if the 
temperature is increased.
Our scientific heritage
Water has primarily been used as a solvent for the preparation of 
medicinal formulations in Ayurveda, Siddha, and other traditional 
systems of medicine in India. Additionally, drug formulations have 
been prepared using hydro-alcoholic extracts of the herbs. The 
Indian systems of medicine have also referred to the use of oils, 
ghee, milk, and other substances as solvents for drug formulations, 
to help achieve the therapeutic benefits of the drug. 
Be a scientist 
What inspired Asima Chatterjee to work on medicinal plants?
Asima Chatterjee is renowned for her work in 
developing anti-epileptic and anti-malarial drugs. She 
used solvents and solutions extensively to extract and 
isolate important compounds from medicinal plants. 
She earned a Doctorate of Science, becoming the 
second Indian woman to do so after Janaki Ammal. She 
became the first woman to receive the Shanti Swarup 
Bhatnagar Award in the field of chemical science and 
was also honoured with the Padma Bhushan. 
Laboratory stand
Laboratory 
thermometer
Glass rod
Beaker
Water 
containing 
baking soda
Wire gauze
Tripod stand
Spirit lamp
Fig. 9.7: Dissolution of baking soda in water
Chapter 9.indd 138 6/28/2025 5:05:50 PM
Reprint 2026-27
