Chapter 9 — The Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, and Solutions
140
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
9.4 Why Do Objects Float or Sink in Water?
You must have observed that some objects float while 
others sink in water (Fig. 9.9). You may have noticed that, 
while washing rice, husk particles present in the rice float 
on the surface of water while rice sinks to the bottom 
of the container. Why does this happen? If you add oil 
to water, it floats on water. Generally, it is believed that 
objects that float in a liquid are lighter and others that 
sink are heavier than the liquid.
A wooden stick and an iron rod may be of the same size, 
yet the iron rod feels much heavier. When we say that iron 
is heavier than wood, we are referring to a special property 
known as density, which describes the heaviness of an object. 
Note
However, the density of a substance is not the only factor that 
decides whether it will float or sink in a particular liquid.
Let us explore further.
9.5 What Is Density?
Imagine a crowded bus where many people are packed 
together—this is an example of high density whereas, 
the same bus with only a few people is an example of 
low density. Similarly, a forest where trees grow close 
to each other is called a dense forest (Fig. 9.10a), but if 
the trees are far apart (Fig. 9.10b), it is considered less 
dense.
How do scientists define density? 
Let us find out.
We have learnt that matter is anything that possesses 
mass and occupies space (volume). Density is defined 
as the mass present in a unit volume of that substance.
The density of a substance may be expressed 
mathematically using the formula:
Density = 
Mass
Volume
The density of a substance is independent of its shape or size. 
However, it is dependent on temperature and pressure. Pressure 
primarily affects the density of gases, while its effect on solids 
and liquids is negligible.
Fig. 9.9: Some objects float 
while others sink in water
Fig. 9.10 (a): Dense forest
Fig. 9.10 (b): Less dense forest
Chapter 9.indd 140 6/28/2025 5:06:01 PM
Reprint 2026-27
