Chapter 9 — The Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, and Solutions
142
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
You may measure the mass by doing the following activity.
Activity 9.3: Let us measure
z Switch ON the digital weighing balance.
z Observe the initial reading on the digital weighing 
balance display. 
z It should show a zero reading. If not, then we must 
bring it to zero by pressing the tare or reset button 
(Fig. 9.12a).
z Place a dry and clean watch glass or butter paper 
on the pan.
z Note the reading on the digital weighing balance.
z Reset the digital weighing balance reading to zero 
by pressing the tare or reset button as shown in 
Fig. 9.12b.
z Now, carefully place the solid object, such as stone, 
on the watch glass (Fig. 9.12c).
z Note the reading displayed on the balance, which 
gives the mass of the stone, say 16.400 g.
(You may use any other type of balance available in 
your school.)
Fig. 9.12(a): Digital 
weighing balance
Digital 
weighing 
balance
Fig. 9.12(b): Tare the balance 
after placing a watch glass
Watch 
glass
Fig. 9.12(c): Weighing a solid 
object on digital balance
Stone 
or solid 
object
Note
The mass of a liquid may be measured by replacing 
the watch glass with a beaker and pouring the desired 
amount of liquid into it.
A step further
As mentioned in Chapter 5, the words ‘mass’ and 
‘weight’ are often used interchangeably in everyday 
language. But they have different meanings in 
science, which can sometimes cause confusion. 
Mass is the quantity of matter present in an object 
or a substance. Its units are gram (g) and kilogram 
(kg). On the other hand, weight is the force by which 
the Earth attracts an object or a substance towards 
itself, and it is measured in newtons (N). Most balances (except two-pan 
balances like in Fig. 9.13) actually measure weight, but their scales are marked 
in mass units, so they show values in grams or kilograms (Fig. 9.12c).
Pan Pan
Hook
Pointer
Fig. 9.13: Two-pan balance
Chapter 9.indd 142 6/28/2025 5:06:10 PM
Reprint 2026-27
