6
Understanding Society:
India and Beyond
Grade 9 – Part 1 
Over the next two years, you will study the processes that shape the 
Earth’s surface and the formation of different landforms. You will 
learn about the atmosphere and climate, oceans, major biomes and 
India’s biosphere reserves. You will also be introduced to geospatial 
technologies, life in different regions of India and the world, 
geographical and socio-economic perspectives on selected issues, 
and the historical development of geographical knowledge.
History
History is the study of human past, through which societies seek to 
understand people’s experiences, values, and changes over time. 
There are multiple ways to interpret the past and transmit cultural 
values from one generation to the next. One of the oldest and most 
influential traditions of preserving cultural memory in Bharat is 
the itihāsa-purāṇa tradition. Through stories, this tradition not 
only shares historical information but also gives cultural meaning 
to events and people. In doing so, it reinforces enduring ideals and 
values, offering a sense of identity and purpose. Across cultures, 
different historical traditions have utilised different methods. Some 
traditions emphasise moral and philosophical insight, while others 
offer documentary verification. Modern historiography, by contrast, 
increasingly relies on empirical evidence and uses tools, such as 
human genetics, carbon-14 dating, archaeology, and other scientific 
methods to establish timelines and understand the past.
History writing draws on a wide range of sources to understand 
the social realities of the past. These include archaeological and 
literary traditions such as travelogues, memoirs, correspondence, 
genealogical records, folklore and oral traditions, and revenue 
documents. Material remains used to study the past are known as 
archaeological sources. These include monuments, architectural 
structures, excavated sites, artefacts, objects, and art, such as 
sculptures and paintings. Their analysis often involves scientific 
instruments and laboratory testing. 
Over the next two years, you will learn about early human history 
and trace major developments in India from the beginnings of 
civilisation to the present day. You will also explore key landmarks 
in world history, including the Greco-Roman world, the Reformation, 
the Renaissance, the Enlightenment, and the Industrial Revolution. 
In addition, you will examine colonialism, its global impact, and 
various anti-colonial struggles across the world. Overall, you 
will develop an understanding of the histories of diverse peoples, 
cultures, and the events that have shaped the present.
Empirical 
evidence:
Information 
collected 
by actual 
observation or 
experimentation.
Genealogical 
records: 
Documents or 
sources that trace 
family lineage 
and ancestry 
by recording 
relationships 
between 
generations and 
documenting 
events, such as 
births, marriages, 
and deaths.
Chapter 1.indd 6 20-Jun-26 5:52:08 PM
