65Tapestry of the Past 3 – Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries
as Bāṇa), who wrote Kādambarī, a beautiful literary work and 
one of the world’s first novels. Bāṇa also composed a biography 
of Harṣha titled Harṣhacharita. Inscriptions depict Harṣha as a 
devotee of Śhiva; according to other sources, he was also deeply 
attached to Buddhism, while showing respect for all schools of 
thought and belief.
DON’T MISS OUT
The 7th-century novel Kādambarī has a very elaborate and 
complex plot. It tells of the love story between a prince from 
Ujjayinī, and Kādambarī, a celestial being. Their romance 
runs across different births, dreams, and divine worlds, with 
a story often told within another story. On the way, we get 
glimpses of courtly life, philosophy, nature and aesthetics. 
Bāṇa died before completing the novel; it was completed by 
his son, and is regarded as a masterpiece of classical Indian 
literature.
Apart from several inscriptions, an important 
historical source for the period is the travelogue kept 
by yet another Chinese pilgrim to India. Remember, 
in Part 1 of this textbook we met Faxian, who in 
the 5th century left a valuable account of the Gupta 
era. Now, two centuries later, Xuanzang (his name 
was earlier transcribed as Hsuan Tsang or Hiuen 
Tsang) set out on his journey to India and travelled 
around the subcontinent between 630 and 644. (We 
met him briefly in the chapter ‘The Story of Indian 
Farming’ in this textbook, and earlier in ‘India, That 
Is Bharat’ in Grade 6.) Just as Faxian, his motivation 
for undertaking such a long and difficult journey 
was to visit sacred Buddhist sites and learn doctrines 
from Indian teachers; he brought back to China more 
than 600 manuscripts of Buddhist texts in Sanskrit 
(carried by 20 horses!) and set about translating them 
into Chinese. He also left a meticulous account of his 
Fig. 3.6. A statue of 
Xuanzang, carrying 
his travel pack, at the 
Longmen Caves of eastern 
China (a cave complex 
with many Buddhist 
statues and carvings)
Chapter 3.indd 65 11/27/2025 12:27:06 PM
Reprint 2026-27
