69Tapestry of the Past 3 – Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries
 THINK ABOUT IT
Some historians state that Dharmapāla was Buddhist; he 
certainly patronised Buddhist learning and institutions. But 
we should keep in mind that in ancient India, the concept of 
religion was more fluid than it is today, and except perhaps 
for monks and nuns, people could feel at ease with various 
belief systems and practise different modes of worship at 
the same time. Indeed, people often did not regard belief 
systems involving Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism as 
separate, but rather as branches of a common philosophical 
tree. Besides, rulers often took pride in patronising several 
schools of thought; we saw the case of the Guptas in Part 1 
of this textbook, and Harṣha gives us one more example of 
such broad-mindedness. Similarly, several successors of 
Dharmapāla, though still patronising Buddhist institutions, 
were said to be devotees of Śhiva. The Rāṣhṭrakūṭas (p. 71) 
and other rulers will provide more examples of this.
A university with scholars as ‘gatekeepers’
Dharmapāla founded Vikramaśhilā in the late 8th century on 
the banks of the Ganga. It remained a great centre of learning 
for more than four centuries. The university had six colleges, 
monasteries, temples, lecture halls, and a vast library. Nearly 
3,000 scholars studied subjects such as grammar, logic, Hindu 
and Buddhist philosophy, learning and rituals. Admission was 
highly selective as each college had a dvārapaṇḍita (‘scholar 
gatekeeper’) who tested students before allowing them entry. 
Vikramaśhilā was especially known for its ties with Tibet; one 
of its famous teachers travelled to Tibet, translated Sanskrit 
works into Tibetan and played a major role in shaping Tibetan 
Buddhism (also called Vajrayāna Buddhism, see Chapter ‘India 
and Her Neighbours’ in this textbook).
Such important centres of learning — there were hundreds, if 
not thousands, spread across India — kept alive and enriched 
India’s long-standing knowledge traditions.
Chapter 3.indd 69 11/27/2025 12:27:09 PM
Reprint 2026-27
