73Tapestry of the Past 3 – Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries
Kashmir
Far to the north, in the mid-8th century, a new power was stirring 
in the Himalayan kingdom of Kāśhmīra — present-day Kashmir. 
Apart from inscriptions and coins, we learn about its successive 
rulers from Kalhaṇa, who authored Rājatarangiṇī — literally 
‘the River of Kings’ (see the Box below). Among the many kings 
and a few queens whose rule Kalhaṇa describes, Lalitāditya 
Muktāpīda of the Kārkoṭa dynasty is seen as a firm ruler. After 
him, however, Kashmir’s political scene experienced many 
internal conflicts and shifts of power, including some rulers 
seizing the throne by force. In the late 10th century, for instance, 
Queen Diddā consolidated her power through strategic alliances 
but also, according to Kalhaṇa, by ruthlessly eliminating rivals, 
including her own grandsons. She founded a few towns, built 
several temples, and restored many more. 
 DON’T MISS OUT
Kashmiri scholar and poet Kalhaṇa composed the epic poem 
Rājatarangiṇī in Sanskrit in the 12th century. In it, he narrated 
the history of Kashmir’s ruling dynasties from its beginnings to 
his own time.
Kalhaṇa also spells out his approach to history in these words: 
“My effort is to give a connected account where the narratives 
of past events have become fragmentary in many respects. … 
I have examined eleven earlier works composed by former 
scholars containing the chronicles of kings ... And by consulting 
inscriptions relating to temple consecrations, royal grants, 
laudatory records, and other written works, I have overcome 
many difficulties caused by errors.”
Through all these depictions, Kalhaṇa’s purpose was not merely 
to record history as he understood it, but also to highlight the 
rulers’ ethical values — or lack of them, as the case may be — so 
as to draw moral lessons from history. He wrote, “Those who are 
intent on harassing their subjects perish with their families; on 
the other hand, fortune waits on even the descendants of those 
who reinstate order where there is chaos.”
Chapter 3.indd 73 29-11-2025 10:20:54
Reprint 2026-27
