78Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
experiencing both victories and defeats, as well as occasional 
alliances. The Eastern Chālukyas promoted several Hindu and 
Jain sects, as well as Buddhist centres; Telugu and Kannada 
literature flourished under their rule. 
The Pallavas
In the Grade 7 Part 1 textbook, we saw the emergence of 
the Pallavas. With its capital at Kānchī (or Kānchipura, 
present-day Kanchipuram in Tamil Nadu, Fig. 3.16), the 
dynasty reached its peak in the 7th century under 
Mahendravarman I and his son Narasimhavarman I. The 
latter was also known as ‘Mamalla’, which means ‘wrestler’ 
or ‘warrior’; indeed, it was he who defeated Pulakeśhin II and 
went on to capture Badami. However, he retreated, keeping 
the Tungabhadra River as an unwritten boundary between 
the two powers. He also sent a naval expedition to Sri Lanka 
to help a Sinhalese prince recover his lost throne.
Kanchipuram was not only an important cultural centre but 
also an economic hub, with trade in goods such as spices, 
textiles (including silk), ivory and other luxury goods. The 
Pallavas developed trade relations not only with Sri Lanka 
but also with much of Southeast Asia via several seaports, in 
particular Māmallapuram (also known as Mahabalipuram, 
see Fig. 3.16), where ancient Chinese, Persian, and Roman 
coins were found during excavations.
We meet Xuanzang again in Kānchī, who speaks of the 
existence of 100 Buddhist monasteries with 10,000 priests 
(figures likely exaggerated) and also mentions 80 Hindu 
temples and the presence of many Jains. In his opinion, “the 
people are deeply attached to the principles of honesty and 
truth, and highly esteem learning.”
The Pallavas created many temples and other structures 
(Fig. 3.1). At Māmallapuram, elaborate rock-cut caves and 
monolithic temples were carved in a distinctive style, 
depicting deities (Fig. 3.18) or illustrating scenes associated 
with the Mahābhārata. The Pallavas were patrons of Jain, 
Vaishnavite and Shaivite schools of thought. They promoted 
Monolithic:
Made of 
a single 
(‘mono’) 
stone or rock 
(‘lithic’).
Chapter 3.indd 78 11/27/2025 12:27:15 PM
Reprint 2026-27
