83Tapestry of the Past 3 – Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries
Trade, economy and urbanisation
During this period, the land grant system that had begun 
under the Guptas expanded greatly. Kings, chiefs, royal family 
members, and vassals gave land to individuals, communities, 
and religious establishments, creating a new class of 
landholders. Many of these holders did not till the land 
themselves, suggesting that powerful intermediaries often 
exploited peasants, as several texts and inscriptions allude to.
Many grants aimed to bring uncultivated land under cultivation, 
expanding agriculture and crop diversity. Classical texts on 
agricultural techniques (see ‘The Story of Indian Farming’ in 
this textbook) reflect this era’s emphasis on farming. Many 
small-scale and some large state-supported irrigation works 
were undertaken. The Pallavas, for example, built numerous 
tanks in Tamil Nadu, many of which are still functional today. 
Many inscriptions record the sponsorship of a well, a pond, or 
a tank, thereby elevating the donor’s social status. With better 
irrigation and agricultural growth, 
cash crops thrived, supporting 
agro-based crafts and industries.
Alongside agriculture, trade and 
markets flourished in regional 
trade centres. Small traders 
handled local trade, while 
ship-owning merchants conducted 
long-distance commerce. From 
the 8th century onward, India’s 
west coast saw brisk shipping with 
ports in present-day Iran, Iraq, and 
Africa’s east coast, while India’s 
east coast connected with Sri 
Lanka, Southeast Asia and all the 
way to Chinese ports (see Fig. 2.2
earlier in this textbook). A similar 
activity prevailed on the east 
coast under the Cheras; a set 
Fig. 3.22. A 7th-century hero stone at 
Eduthanur, a village in Tamil Nadu. The 
inscription praises this local chief who, along 
with his loyal dog, fought cattle thieves, both of 
them losing their lives. (The chief’s and even the 
dog’s names are given in the inscription.)
Chapter 3.indd 83 02-12-2025 11:51:51
Reprint 2026-27
