85Tapestry of the Past 3 – Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries
Much of the data on the jātis comes from texts, and some from 
inscriptions, but overall there are many gaps and unanswered 
questions. Moreover, the system varied widely across regions, 
showing that varṇa and jāti were flexible rather than rigid. For 
instance, several sources indicate that the Pālas and the Kākatīyas 
(whom we will meet in the next chapter), among other rulers, 
were originally Śhūdras (the varṇa of labourers, craftspeople, 
etc.), but in the course of time, they would have been regarded 
as Kṣhatriyas (the varṇa of rulers and warriors). 
At the same time, terms like aspṛiśhya (literally, ‘not to be 
touched’) appeared in a few texts, pointing to discrimination 
against some communities regarded as ‘impure’. This is 
confirmed by other sources, such as Xuanzang, who noted, 
“Butchers, fishers, dancers, executioners, and scavengers, and 
so on, have their abodes without the city. ... Their houses are 
surrounded by low walls, and form the suburbs.” 
Despite such divisions, different varṇas and jātis often 
functioned cooperatively, as they depended on each other’s 
work and function, at least at the economic level. We will also 
see below the so-called ‘Bhakti Movement’, which cut across all 
strata of the society; several bhakti saints, for instance, were 
Śhūdras.
 THINK ABOUT IT
How does a professional group transform into a jāti? Such a 
process was complex and could vary from region to region. Let 
us look at one example.
The Kāyasthas, historically known as scribes or clerks, were 
initially a professional group open to different varṇas. In the 
10th century, they became a distinct jāti. In parts of Bengal, 
certain Brāhmaṇa surnames such as Vasu, Ghosha, Datta, and 
Dama, later came to be associated with Kāyasthas, indicating 
a fusion of Brāhmaṇa and non-Brāhmaṇa families. Over 
time, they married mainly within their group, forming the 
Kāyastha jāti.
Chapter 3.indd 85 11/27/2025 12:27:17 PM
Reprint 2026-27
