91Tapestry of the Past 3 – Empires and Kingdoms: 6th to 10th Centuries
The Arabs arrive on India’s shores
Within a few years of the death of Islam’s founder, Muhammad, 
in 632 CE, the new religion had spread far into Asia and Africa. 
In 637, India’s western coast witnessed naval raids by Muslim 
Arabs on Thānā (present-day Thane), Bhārukachchha (present-day 
Bharuch) and Debal (a port city in the delta of the Indus), though 
without securing lasting territorial control. The first attempts to 
conquer Afghan kingdoms were also unsuccessful, as they met 
with fierce resistance. 
However, things changed when the governor of Iraq sent an army 
under the command of his nephew and son-in-law, Muhammad 
bin Qasim. These forces swept into Sindh. Debal fell first, where, 
according to the 9th-century historian Al-Balādhurī, bin Qasim 
“kept up the slaughter of the inhabitants for three days” and had a 
“great temple … housing idols destroyed”. From there, bin Qasim 
moved eastward towards Aror (also Alor, present-day Rohri in 
Sindh), the capital of King Dāhar. According to the Chachnāma
 (a 13th-century Persian rendering of an older Arabic account), bin 
Qasim declared to Dāhar, “I consider it my bounden duty to carry 
on this religious war, in obedience to the orders of God who says 
in the Koran: ‘Wage war against the infidels’…” In a fierce battle, 
Dāhar, riding atop an elephant, was killed by an arrow, following 
which his army was routed.
LET’S EXPLORE
The Chachnāma records that when King Dāhar was killed, 
his widowed queen put up a brave resistance, and when 
the situation became hopeless, she immolated herself along 
with other ladies. Another queen ordered her treasure to be 
distributed among the brave soldiers and inspired them to 
stand against the invaders.
Æ What does this suggest about the way the indigenous 
people responded to invasions?
Æ Why do you think the queen chose to give away her 
treasure?
Æ What does this reveal about the role of women in warfare?
Idol: 
A worshipped 
image. 
Because 
orthodox 
sects of 
Judaism, 
Christianity 
and Islam 
condemn 
the worship 
of idols, we 
prefer to 
use the term 
‘image’ or 
Indian words 
such as mūrti 
or vigraha.
Infidel: 
For 
medieval 
Islam, 
infidels 
were non￾Muslims, 
especially 
Hindus, 
Buddhists 
or Jains.
Chapter 3.indd 91 02-12-2025 11:56:36
Reprint 2026-27
