92Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
Within two years of Qasim’s death, Indian chiefs rebelled and 
regained most of the conquered territory. The Arabs did not 
give up easily and soon pushed into Rājputāna and the central 
region of Mālwā, but their gains were short-lived. An inscription 
at Gwalior records how the Gurjara-Pratīhāra king Nāgabhaṭa I, 
whom we met earlier, “crushed the large army of the powerful 
Mlechchha king.”
 THINK ABOUT IT
Sulaiman, a 9th-century Arab merchant and traveller, makes 
this comment on a Gurjara-Pratīhāra ruler: “This king 
maintains numerous forces, and no other Indian prince has 
so fine a cavalry. He is unfriendly to the Arabs … there is 
no greater foe of the Muhammadan faith than he. ... He has 
riches, and his camels and horses are numerous. … There is 
no country in India safer from robbers.” Why do you think 
the author calls the ruler a ‘foe to the Muslim faith’?
The Arabs continued to be frustrated in their advances by 
the stubborn resistance of Indian rulers, who sometimes 
forged alliances to defeat them. Kashmir’s King Lalitāditya 
Muktāpīda, whom we met earlier, defeated an Arab chief three 
times, according to the Rājatarangiṇī. The geographer al-Istakhri 
observed that after three centuries of unremitting effort, the 
Arab dominion in India was limited to just two petty states in 
Sindh and Punjab. Even there, they survived only by giving up 
iconoclasm and using native Hindus and Buddhists (collectively 
called ‘Budds’) for political purposes. 
Overall, the Arab conquest of Sindh had a limited political 
and religious impact compared to their conquests in other 
regions where Islam often replaced local institutions and 
led to mass conversions. In Sindh, whether for strategic reasons 
or by compulsion, the Arabs changed their policy: Hindus and 
Buddhists were allowed to rebuild temples, continue their 
worship, and temple priests were allowed to keep their share of 
revenue.
Mlechchha:
This term, 
which 
originally 
referred to 
those who 
did not speak 
clearly or did 
not follow 
Vedic culture, 
came to refer 
to foreigners.
Chapter 3.indd 92 11/27/2025 12:27:19 PM
Reprint 2026-27
