143 Journey Inside the Atom
1. Suppose you made up your own ‘atom’, as Thomson described, using clay for the 
positive charge and small beads for the electrons spread through it. What will 
happen if:
(i) the positive charge on the clay is lesser than the total negative charge of the beads?
(ii) by mistake, the clay itself carries a bit of negative charge? Would your model still 
represent a neutral atom?
2. Could an orange or a lemon, which also contain seeds inside soft pulp, be a good 
comparison? In what ways does it match Thomson’s idea and where does it fall short?
3. Why did Thomson conclude that electrons are present in all atoms?
Pause and Ponder
8.2.2 Testing Thomson’s model: The gold foil experiment
In 1911, Geiger and Marsden, working under Ernest Rutherford, tested 
Thomson’s model of the atom through what became famous as the 
gold foil experiment. They aimed a narrow beam of alpha particles at 
an extremely thin sheet of gold foil. Alpha (symbol α) particles are tiny, 
positively charged particles emitted from certain radioactive elements. 
Later in this chapter, you will learn that an alpha particle is actually 
a nucleus of a helium atom containing two protons and two neutrons. 
According to Thomson’s model, the positive charge in the atom was spread 
out evenly. So they expected the alpha particles to pass straight through 
the gold foil or be deflected only slightly. But to their surprise, while 
most particles passed through undeflected, some were sharply deflected 
(Fig. 8.4), and a few even bounced back. This deflection from the straight
path is called scattering. Hence, the gold foil experiment is also called an 
α-ray scattering experiment. 
Fig. 8.4: Schematic view of the gold foil experiment
Beam of α-particles
Thin gold foil
T homson’s model failed to explain the results of the gold foil experiment, 
particularly the deflection of some α-particles through large angles and 
that most of the α-particles passed undeflected.
Chapter-08.indd 143 03-04-2026 20:02:32
