144 Exploration|Grade 9
A. Rutherford’s model of an atom 
From the gold foil experiment, Rutherford concluded that the positive 
charge of an atom is not spread throughout but remains concentrated in an 
extremely small region called the nucleus. He proposed that:
y Most of an atom is empty space, as most α-particles passed through the 
gold foil without any deflection.
y The nucleus is dense, contains all the positive charge and most of the 
mass of an atom.
y The electrons revolve around the nucleus, somewhat like planets 
orbiting the Sun. Hence, this model is called the planetary model of 
the atom (Fig. 8.5).
Rutherford found that the nucleus is extremely small — about 105
 (one 
lakh) times smaller than the atom. He calculated that the diameter of an 
atom is ≈ 10−10 m, and the diameter of the nucleus is ≈ 10–15 m. You can 
imagine that if an atom were of the size of a cricket ground (about 100 m 
across), the nucleus would be just a tiny black pepper grain (a few mm) at 
the centre! 
Can you calculate how many atoms would be needed to make a sheet of paper that 
is 0.1 mm thick, like the one in your textbook?
If the diameter of one atom is about 10–10 m, and the sheet is 0.1 mm (10–4 m) thick,
number of atoms ≈ (10–4 m) ÷ (10–10 m) = 106
.
That is about one million atoms need to be stacked together! When these 
atoms come together, they form the solid materials we see and touch. What feels 
like a simple sheet is actually a vast assembly of tiny building blocks, all neatly 
arranged. It’s amazing how the unseen atomic world shapes everything we see 
and use every day!
Ready to Go Beyond 
Observe Fig. 8.4 of the gold foil experiment. Predict the observations you would 
expect if the gold foil in the experiment were made thicker. Also, draw a simple 
diagram to show the observations you expect.
Hint: Compare thin foil vs thick foil. How does the thickness affect the chances of 
hitting a nucleus?
Think as a Scientist
4. What do you think would happen if α-particles were replaced with negatively 
charged particles in Rutherford’s gold foil experiment?
5. Rutherford found that a few α-particles bounced back sharply. How does this 
single surprising result completely rule out Thomson’s ʻplum pudding modelʼ 
of the atom?
6. If you could ask Rutherford one question about his work, what would it be?
Pause and Ponder
Fig. 8.5: Planetary model 
suggested by Rutherford
Chapter-08.indd 144 03-04-2026 20:02:33
