145 Journey Inside the Atom
Rutherford’s atomic model was better than Thomson’s atomic 
model in explaining the results of the gold foil experiment. 
However, it had a limitation. It could not explain the stability of 
the atom.
B. Limitations of Rutherford’s model 
While the idea of a central nucleus was a major step forward, 
Rutherford’s model could not explain why atoms are stable.
As you have learnt in Chapter 4, Describing Motion Around Us, 
a particle moving in a circular path is constantly changing 
direction, which means it is accelerating. If a negatively charged 
electron keeps accelerating around the nucleus, it should lose 
energy. Losing energy would make it spiral inward and eventually 
fall into the positively charged nucleus (Fig. 8.6). If that really 
happened, atoms would collapse 
and would not exist! But in reality, 
atoms are stable that is why matter 
around us stays intact. This meant 
that Rutherford’s model was not 
completely correct, and a new 
explanation was needed to describe 
how electrons remain in motion 
without collapsing into the nucleus. 
But before we come to that, you need to 
know about another subatomic particle, the 
proton, discovered and named by Rutherford.
C. Discovery of the proton 
Rutherford showed that the nucleus carries positive charge which comes 
from the particles called protons. Protons are much heavier than electrons 
and possess a charge equal and opposite to that of electrons. 
For an atom to be electrically neutral, the number of protons must be 
equal to the number of electrons. For example, a helium atom has 2 protons 
and 2 electrons, while a sodium atom has 11 protons and 11 electrons. Since 
the total positive charge equals the total negative charge, the helium or 
the sodium atoms are also electrically neutral. Similarly, all the atoms are 
electrically neutral.
7. Assertion (A): Rutherford concluded that most of the mass of an atom is concentrated in 
a small region at the centre called the nucleus.
Reason (R): According to Thomson’s model, electrons are embedded in a uniformly 
distributed positive charge sphere.
Choose the correct option:
(i) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
(ii) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(iii) A is true, but R is false.
(iv) A is false, but R is true.
Pause and Ponder
Fig. 8.6: Spiral path followed by a 
charged particle on losing energy
Born 
in New 
Zealand, 
Ernest 
Rutherford
moved to 
Cambridge 
to work with J. J. Thomson 
and later became known 
as the Father of Nuclear 
Physics. He discovered 
the atomic nucleus and 
explained how some 
elements naturally break 
down, for which he won 
the 1908 Nobel Prize in 
Chemistry. In 1911, he 
proposed the nuclear 
model of the atom. His 
portrait now appears 
on New Zealand’s $100 
banknote.
Meet a Scientist
Chapter-08.indd 145 03-04-2026 20:02:34
