146 Exploration|Grade 9
8.2.3 Bohr’s model of the atom 
To explain why atoms are stable, Niels Bohr 
proposed a new model of the atom in 1913. 
According to Bohr:
y Electrons do not move randomly around the 
nucleus but follow fixed circular paths called
stationary states, orbits, or shells. In each shell, 
an electron has a definite amount of energy, so 
these shells are also called energy levels.
y These shells are represented by the letters K, L, 
M, N, ... or by the numbers n = 1, 2, 3, 4, ... (Fig. 8.7).
y Electrons can revolve only in these allowed shells, and not in between 
them. While moving in a fixed shell, an electron does not lose energy. 
y The first energy level K (n = 1) is the one closest to the nucleus (Fig. 8.7) 
and has the least energy. 
y The energy of these levels increases as we move away from the 
nucleus. That is, the energy of an electron in the L-shell (n = 2) is more 
than that of an electron in the K-shell (n = 1). The farther away a shell 
is from the nucleus, the higher is its energy.
y An electron can move to another shell by absorbing or releasing a 
fixed amount of energy equal to the difference between the energies 
of the two levels.
y Each shell can hold only a certain number of electrons. 
You may be wondering, how does Bohr’s model explain stability? 
In Bohr’s model, electrons also move in circular paths around the 
positively charged nucleus, as in Rutherford’s model. But why don’t 
they lose energy while doing so? Bohr addressed this by introducing the 
concept of stationary states as a postulate. In a stationary state, the energy 
of an electron remains constant, even though it is in motion around the 
nucleus. Bohr’s model could explain many experimental observations 
and marked a major step in understanding the atomic structure.
Why are Bohr’s shells called K, L, M, N... and not, A, B, C, D? 
The naming came from early X‑ray experiments by the physicist, Charles 
Barkla, who called the first observed X-ray line K. He didn’t start naming 
from A to leave room for possible discovery of a series earlier than the 
K series, although none were ever found. Bohr adopted the same notation 
for atomic shells.
Threads of Curiosity
Later, even Bohr’s model was found to have limitations, and yet 
another model, the quantum mechanical model, was proposed. 
You will learn about it in higher grades. Next
Level
Up
Fig. 8.7: Energy levels in an 
atom
K-shell (n=1)
Nucleus
L-shell (n=2)
M-shell (n=3)
N-shell (n=4)
Meet a Scientist
Niels Bohr was 
a professor 
of physics at 
Copenhagen 
University, 
Denmark. He 
was curious 
about how atoms 
exist because 
the old models 
could not explain 
why electrons 
stay around the 
nucleus without 
collapsing. His 
explanation of the 
atomic structure 
provided more 
clarity. Niels Bohr 
received the Nobel 
Prize in 1922, for 
his work on the 
structure of the 
atom. 
Chapter-08.indd 146 03-04-2026 20:02:35
