147 Journey Inside the Atom
8.3 What Components Contribute to the 
Mass of an Atom? 
Rutherford’s model showed that most of the mass of an atom is 
concentrated in its nucleus. Electrons that revolve around the 
nucleus are so light that their mass can be ignored.
However, something puzzling appeared early in the 20th 
century. For instance, a hydrogen atom has one proton, whereas 
a helium atom has two protons, yet the mass of a helium atom 
is about four times that of a hydrogen atom, not double. This led 
scientists to wonder whether besides protons, is there something 
else in the nucleus adding mass without affecting its charge? 
8.3.1 Discovery of the Neutron
In 1932, this problem was solved by James Chadwick (a student 
of Ernest Rutherford). He discovered a new subatomic particle 
with a mass nearly equal to that of a proton but no electrical 
charge. This neutral particle was named as neutron and is 
usually represented by the symbol ‘n’. The neutrons are found 
in the nucleus of all atoms except hydrogen. Thus, the mass of 
an atom comes mainly from its protons and neutrons packed 
tightly in the nucleus. This also explains why atoms are heavier 
than the mass of their total number of protons. Table 8.1 shows 
the symbols and relative charges of subatomic particles.
Table 8.1: Symbols and relative charges of subatomic particles
S.No. Subatomic particle Symbol Relative charge
1. Electron e – –1
2. Proton p+ +1
3. Neutron n0 0
Lighter atoms often have an equal number of protons and neutrons 
(like carbon with six each or oxygen with eight each). However, 
as atoms get heavier, their nuclei have many more neutrons than 
protons. Iron has 26 protons and 30 neutrons, and by the time we 
reach uranium, the nucleus has 92 protons and 146 neutrons.
You may wonder that since all the protons with like charges 
are squished together in a nucleus why do they not push each 
other away? 
Think of it this way — every proton inside the nucleus repels 
every other proton because they all carry positive charge. 
Neutrons being neutral help reduce this repulsion by intervening 
and increasing the distance between protons, and also by 
strengthening the force, called the nuclear force, that binds all 
particles together. So, heavier atoms need many more neutrons 
to hold everything in the nucleus tightly bound.
Threads of Curiosity
Meet a Scientist
James 
Chadwick, 
working 
under 
Rutherford 
at the 
famous 
Cavendish 
Laboratory at the University 
of Cambridge, solved 
a key puzzle in 1932, 
when he discovered the 
neutron. This breakthrough 
explained atomic mass 
and earned him the Nobel 
Prize in Physics in 1935. 
The neutron immediately 
transformed research, 
enabling scientists to probe 
nuclear secrets, and sparked 
a chain of discoveries 
in understanding and 
harnessing atomic energy.
Ready to Go Beyond 
The discovery of the 
neutron opened a new 
era in atomic physics. 
Neutrons, being 
uncharged, can easily 
penetrate nuclei, leading 
to breakthroughs, 
such as the creation of 
artificial radioactive 
elements and the 
splitting of uranium 
atoms. This gave birth to 
the ʻatomic ageʼ, allowing 
the development of 
both nuclear power and 
nuclear weapons.
What if ...
an atom had no empty 
space? How would this 
have affected the size 
of various objects?
Chapter-08.indd 147 03-04-2026 20:02:37
