148 Exploration|Grade 9
The Bhabha Atomic Research 
Centre (BARC, Fig. 8.8), Mumbai, 
leads advanced neutron-scattering 
experiments using reactors, such 
as Dhruva. This has revealed 
key insights into materials 
like superconductors, battery 
electrodes, and drug molecules, 
helping develop better medicines, 
energy storage, and industrial 
alloys right here in India.
Research and explore more about Dhruva!
India's Scientific Contributions
Fig. 8.8: Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
By 1869, scientists knew about 69 elements, most of which were found 
naturally on the Earth. Today, we know about 118 unique chemical elements. 
Some of these are artificially made, and the search for even more continues.
Now, let us explore how elements began to be represented for the sake 
of simplicity.
8.4 Symbols of Elements
John Dalton realised the need for a standard way to represent elements and 
compounds to make the study of chemistry easier. In 1803, he introduced 
the first pictorial symbols to represent the known elements. The Fig. 8.9 
shows some of the symbols.
Fig. 8.9: Symbols of some elements given by Dalton
Hydrogen Carbon Oxygen Phosphorus
Sulphur Iron Copper Lead
Silver Gold Platina Mercury
In 1813, Berzelius suggested that the symbols of elements should be 
derived from their Latin names. Thus, came alphabetic chemical symbols. 
Nowadays, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), 
an international scientific organisation, approves the names and symbols 
of elements. Some of the norms of writing these symbols are:
y Many symbols are the first letter or the first two letters of the name of 
the element.
y The first letter of a symbol is always written as a capital letter 
(uppercase) while the second letter (if there is one) is written as a small 
letter (lowercase). For example, hydrogen, H; aluminium, Al (not AL); 
cobalt, Co (not CO), etc.
y Symbols of some elements are formed from the first letter of the name 
and a letter other than the second letter in the name. For example, 
chlorine, Cl; zinc, Zn, etc.
Chapter-08.indd 148 03-04-2026 20:02:41
