153 Journey Inside the Atom
8.8 Combining Capacity of an Atom: Valency
You have learnt that atoms of the same or different elements can combine 
to form molecules. The number of atoms of hydrogen or chlorine with 
which one atom of an element can combine to form a compound is 
called its combining capacity. It is expressed in terms of hydrogen 
and chlorine because both possess a combining capacity of one. For 
example, in H2
O (water), oxygen combines with two hydrogen atoms, so 
the combining capacity of oxygen is two. In NH3 (ammonia) and MgCl2
(magnesium chloride), what will be the combining capacities of nitrogen 
and magnesium respectively? These examples show how the combining 
capacity of elements is determined by the number of hydrogen or chlorine 
atoms they combine with.
Let us learn how the combining capacity of an atom is decided by its 
electronic configuration.
The outermost shell containing electrons of an atom is known as 
its valence shell. The electrons present in it are known as valence 
electrons. 
If the outermost shell of an atom has 8 electrons, it is called an octet. 
It has been observed that elements with complete octet of electrons 
(8 electrons), or 2 electrons in the case of helium in their valence shell 
are largely unreactive and more stable. On the other hand, atoms with 
incomplete valence shells are usually more reactive. Such elements lose, 
gain, or share electrons to complete their octet. 
The number of electrons gained, lost, or shared to complete the octet 
is called the valency of the element. Generally, if the element has fewer 
than four electrons in its valence shell, it tends to lose electrons to complete 
its octet and become stable. On the other hand, if the number of valence 
electrons is more than four, it tends to gain electrons to complete its octet. For 
example, the electronic configuration of sodium is 2, 8, 1. It can get an octet 
by losing one electron. Therefore, its valency or combining capacity is 1. 
On the other hand, oxygen has an electronic configuration of 2, 6. It has six 
valence electrons. Therefore, it can gain two electrons to attain an octet, 
its valency is 2. The electronic configuration of carbon is 2, 4. Carbon has 
four valence electrons and cannot easily gain or lose them. Therefore, it 
can share four electrons with other atoms to complete its octet. Thus, the 
valency of carbon is 4. Some compounds appear to violate the usual valency 
rule, about which you will learn in higher grades. 
Can you predict what happens to the atoms that already have eight 
electrons in their outermost shell (except the elements with one shell only, 
where only two electrons are possible)? Will they still try to lose or gain 
electrons?
Examine Table 8.4. Add one more column to it, and write down the 
common valency of each element.
You have learnt that all the atoms of an element have the same number 
of electrons and protons, which is equal to its atomic number. Can you say 
the same regarding the number of neutrons too? Scientists have observed 
that atoms of the same element can have different numbers of neutrons. 
What effect does this difference have on the properties of the atom? Let us 
try to find out!
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 7
Next
Level
Up
Chapter-08.indd 153 03-04-2026 20:02:42
