154 Exploration|Grade 9
8.9 A Deeper Look into Atomic Structure
8.9.1 Isotopes
Dalton proposed that all atoms of an element are identical and have 
the same mass. But scientists later discovered that there were atoms of 
the same element that could have the same number of protons (atomic 
number, Z) yet could have different numbers of neutrons, and thus, 
different mass numbers (A = p+
 + n0
). These ʻtwin atomsʼ with the same 
atomic number but different mass numbers are called isotopes.
Let us take hydrogen as an example. Naturally occurring hydrogen 
is a mixture of three different isotopes: 1
1 H (protium, ~99.98%), 2
1 H
(deuterium, ~0.015%), and 3
1 H (tritium, in traces) (Fig. 8.12). All of these 
contain one proton each, whereas deuterium contains one neutron, and 
tritium contains two neutrons. Can you guess how many electrons each of 
these isotopes have?
Fig. 8.12: Schematic representation of isotopes of hydrogen 
Protium Deuterium Tritium
The chemical properties of isotopes are similar. Do you 
know why? It is so because they have the same number of 
electrons and the same electronic configuration. As you have 
learnt, chemical properties depend mainly on the number of 
valence electrons. All the isotopes will have the same chemical 
properties although they differ in their physical properties, 
for example, boiling and melting points.
Similarly, carbon has three isotopes: 12
6 C, 13
6 C, and 14
6 C
(Fig. 8.13). Each of these has six protons and six electrons.
12
6 C is the most abundant isotope in nature. You may note that 
these three isotopes differ in terms of the number of neutrons 
in them. 
Carbon – 12 Carbon – 13 Carbon – 14
Fig. 8.13: Schematic representation of isotopes of carbon
Let us learn about the essential uses of some isotopes in our daily lives.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Atoms are too tiny to be 
weighed in kilograms 
or grams like everyday 
objects. Just as it is easier 
to weigh a grain of wheat 
in milligrams rather than 
kilograms, scientists use 
a special unit called the 
unified atomic mass unit (u) 
to measure the mass of 
atoms. This is because 
a kilogram is too large 
for such small particles. 
Earlier, atomic mass was 
expressed in atomic mass 
unit (abbreviated as ‘amu’).
Chapter-08.indd 154 03-04-2026 20:02:42
