156 Exploration|Grade 9
This does not mean that any one atom of chlorine has 
a fractional mass of 35.5 u. It means that if you take, say 
1 million chlorine atoms, they will contain 7.5 lakh 35
17 Cl
and 2.5 lakh 37
17 Cl atoms with a weighted average atomic 
mass of 35.5 u.
This comparison shows that the simple average ignores 
abundance, whereas the weighted average accurately reflects 
the mass of the element as it occurs in nature.
17. Two different atoms have 11 protons each, but one has 
12 neutrons, and the other has 13 neutrons. How do their 
atomic numbers and mass numbers compare? Are they 
the same element or different elements?
18. If a bromine atom is available in the form of, say two 
isotopes, 79
35 Br (49.7%) and 81
35 Br (50.3%), calculate the 
average atomic mass of the bromine atom. 
Pause and Ponder
You have learnt that the two atoms that have the same 
atomic number but different mass numbers are called 
isotopes. What if they have the same mass number but 
different atomic numbers? What are such atoms called? Let 
us find out!
8.9.2 Isobars
Let us consider three elements — calcium (atomic number 20), 
potassium (atomic number 19), and argon (atomic number 18). 
These elements have different numbers of protons, yet each 
has a mass number of 40. This shows that the total number 
of nucleons in their atoms is the same, even though they are 
different elements. When atoms of different elements have 
the same mass number, but different atomic numbers, they 
are called isobars.
As we end our journey into the structure of the atom, 
it is important to know that the story does not end here. 
The exploration of the structure of the atom is still being 
discovered (Fig. 8.16). Later, scientists discovered that even 
Bohr’s model was not entirely correct. Electrons do not 
follow well-defined paths like the fixed Bohr orbits. Today, 
we understand that they exist as ʻelectron cloudsʼ around 
the nucleus. We can predict regions where they are most 
likely to be, not exactly where they are. You will learn 
all these details in higher grades. The journey of 
exploring the mysteries of the atom is far from over, 
and exciting discoveries still lie ahead!
Ready to Go Beyond 
Electron microscopes, 
such as Scanning 
Tunnelling Microscopes 
(STMs) and Transmission 
Electron Microscopes 
(TEMs) can produce 
images of materials with 
atomic-level details. STMs 
mainly study surfaces 
(Fig. 8.15), while TEMs 
reveal how atoms are 
arranged inside very thin 
samples.
Fig. 8.15: STM image showing 
individual atoms on a surface
Meet a Scientist
Homi 
Jehangir 
Bhabha was 
an Indian 
physicist. 
He is known 
as the 
father of the Indian nuclear 
programme. He made a 
pioneering contribution 
to the development of 
atomic energy in India. He 
established key institutions 
like the Tata Institute of 
Fundamental Research (TIFR) 
and the Bhabha Atomic 
Research Centre (BARC), 
for peaceful uses of atomic 
energy to generate electricity, 
support agriculture, and 
advanced medical treatments. 
Next
Level
Up
Chapter-08.indd 156 03-04-2026 20:02:51
