Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
18
Initially, when a drop of blue litmus solution is added to the 
lemon juice solution, the colour of the solution turns red. When 
lime water is added to this test tube, the colour of the solution 
eventually changes from red to blue. This shows that the solution 
in the test tube is no longer acidic. Lime water has neutralised 
the eff ect of the acid.
When the solution of an acid is mixed with the solution of a 
base in suffi cient quantity, we fi nd that the resulting solution is 
neither acidic nor basic. Such reactions are called neutralisation
reactions. In a neutralisation reaction, salt and water are formed 
with the evolution (i.e., release) of heat. 
Acid + Base → Salt + Water + Heat
There are many examples in everyday life where you can 
observe the use of neutralisation processes.
Let us fi nd out!
  2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life
Situation 1: Keerthi was observing a butterfl y in 
the garden with her hand resting on a tree trunk. 
Suddenly, a red ant bit her, leaving her skin red 
with stinging pain (Fig. 2.11). Her brother helped 
her by applying moist baking soda to the aff ected 
area, which relieved the pain. What do you think 
might be the reason for this? 
When an ant bites, it injects an acidic liquid 
(formic acid) into the skin. The eff ect of the acid 
can be neutralised by rubbing moist baking soda, 
which is a base.
What remedies do people use to treat ant bites 
in your region? 
Situation 2: On the Farmer’s Portal (an 
online platform from the Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers 
Welfare), a query from a farmer states, “My 
plants are not growing well lately”. After 
a detailed discussion, it was found that 
the excessive use of chemical fertilisers 
(substances added to soil to help plants 
grow better) made the soil acidic. What 
remedy might be provided to him? 
When the soil is too acidic, the plants 
do not grow well. It can be treated with 
lime, which is a base. (Fig. 2.12).
Fig. 2.11: Stinging eff ect 
of an ant bite
Fig. 2.12: Neutralising the acidic 
nature of soil
Chapter 2.indd 18 4/3/2025 4:50:53 PM
Reprint 2026-27
