Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral
19
If the soil is basic, organic matter like manure and composted 
leaves are added to it. Organic matter releases acids that 
neutralise the basic nature of the soil.
Sometimes, the soil may be neutral, but the plants growing in 
it may still show poor health, which can be due to the defi ciency 
of nutrients in the soil.
Situation 3: Ashwin’s friend Gurbir stays near an industrial area. 
He shared with him that the fi sh population in his neighbourhood 
lake was declining day by day! What do you think might be the 
causes for this? It may be due to factory waste being released 
into the lake. 
If the factory waste is acidic in nature, what could be done to 
save the fi sh in the lake? 
The factory waste can be neutralised by adding basic 
substances before releasing into the lake.
Let us wrap up!
Now, can you explain why the words ‘Welcome to the Wonderful 
World of Science’ appeared on Ashwin and Keerthi’s paper sheets 
when the liquid was sprayed on them? 
Do you think that one possibility could be using a turmeric 
solution for the spraying liquid and a soap solution for writing 
on the paper?
In a Nutshell
 Substances around us may be classifi ed as acidic, basic, and 
neutral in nature. 
 Extracts of lichen, red rose, red hibiscus, purple cabbage, 
turmeric, etc., can be used to indicate the nature of substances.
 Substances that show diff erent colours in acidic and basic 
solutions are called acid-base indicators. 
 Acids turn the colour of blue litmus to red. Bases turn the 
colour of red litmus to blue. 
 Extract of red rose gives red colour in acidic solutions and 
green colour in basic solutions. 
 The yellow colour of turmeric turns red in basic solutions 
but remains unchanged in acidic and neutral solutions.
 An acid and a base neutralise each other, forming salt and 
water, along with the evolution of heat.
 Many day-to-day problems like a red ant bite, acidic or basic 
nature of soil, and industrial waste can be attempted to be 
managed by the process of neutralisation.
Chapter 2.indd 19 4/3/2025 4:50:53 PM
Reprint 2026-27
