Ganita Prakash | Grade 7
Evaluating it gives 6
7680 . 
Upon simplifying to its lowest form, we get
6
7680 = 
1
1280.
So, one cowrie shell was given to the beggar.
You can see in the answer Bhāskarāchārya’s humour! The miser had 
given the beggar only one coin of the least value (cowrie).
Around the 12th century, several types of coins were in use in 
different kingdoms of the Indian subcontinent. Most commonly used 
were gold coins (called dinars/gadyanas and hunas), silver coins (called 
drammas/tankas), copper coins (called kasus/panas and mashakas), and 
cowrie shells. The exact conversion rates between these coins varied 
depending on the region, time period, economic conditions, weights of 
coins and their purity. 
Gold coins had high-value and were used in large transactions and 
to store wealth. Silver coins were more commonly used in everyday 
transactions. Copper coins had low-value and were used in smaller 
transactions. Cowrie shells were the lowest denomination and were 
used in very small transactions and as change.
If we assume 1 gold dinar = 12 silver drammas, 1 silver dramma = 4 
copper panas, 1 copper pana = 6 mashakas, and 1 pana = 30 cowrie shells, 
1 copper pana = 1
48 gold dinar ( 1
12 × 
1
4)
1 cowrie shell =____ copper panas
1 cowrie shell =____ gold dinar.
A Pinch of History
As you have seen, fractions are an important type of number, playing 
a critical role in a variety of everyday problems that involve sharing 
and dividing quantities equally. The general notion of non-unit fractions 
as we use them today — equipped with the arithmetic operations of 
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division — developed largely in 
India. The ancient Indian geometry texts called the Śhulbasūtra — which 
go back as far as 800 BCE, and were concerned with the construction 
of fire altars for rituals — used general non-unit fractions extensively, 
including performing division of such fractions as we saw in Example 3.
Fractions even became commonplace in the popular culture of 
India as far back as 150 BCE, as evidenced by an offhand reference to 
the reduction of fractions to lowest terms in the philosophical work of 
the revered Jain scholar Umasvati.
194
Chapter-8.indd 194 4/12/2025 12:41:36 PM
