STRAIGHT LINES 159
3. Find the distance between P (x1
, y1
) and Q (x2
, y2
) when : (i) PQ is parallel to the
y-axis, (ii) PQ is parallel to the x-axis.
4. Find a point on the x-axis, which is equidistant from the points (7, 6) and (3, 4).
5. Find the slope of a line, which passes through the origin, and the mid-point of the
line segment joining the points P (0, – 4) and B (8, 0).
6. Without using the Pythagoras theorem, show that the points (4, 4), (3, 5) and
(–1, –1) are the vertices of a right angled triangle.
7. Find the slope of the line, which makes an angle of 30°
 with the positive direction
of y-axis measured anticlockwise.
8. Without using distance formula, show that points (– 2, – 1), (4, 0), (3, 3) and
(–3, 2) are the vertices of a parallelogram.
9. Find the angle between the x-axis and the line joining the points (3,–1) and (4,–2).
10. The slope of a line is double of the slope of another line. If tangent of the angle
between them is 3
1
, find the slopes of the lines.
11. A line passes through (x1
, y1
) and (h, k). If slope of the line is m, show that
k – y1 = m (h – x1
).
9.3 Various Forms of the Equation of a Line
We know that every line in a plane contains infinitely many points on it. This relationship
between line and points leads us to find the solution of the following problem:
How can we say that a given point lies on the given line? Its answer may be that
for a given line we should have a definite condition on the points lying on the line.
Suppose P (x, y) is an arbitrary point in the XY-plane and L is the given line. For the
equation of L, we wish to construct a statement or condition for the point P that is
true, when P is on L, otherwise false. Of course the statement is merely an algebraic
equation involving the variables x and y. Now, we will discuss the equation of a line
under different conditions.
9.3.1 Horizontal and vertical lines If a horizontal line L is at a distance a from the x￾axis then ordinate of every point lying on the line is either a or – a [Fig 9.8 (a)].
Therefore, equation of the line L is either y = a or y = – a. Choice of sign will depend
upon the position of the line according as the line is above or below the y-axis. Similarly,
the equation of a vertical line at a distance b from the y-axis is either x = b or
x = – b [Fig 9.8(b)].
Reprint 2026-27
