Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 
34
2. Calculating using estimation and approximation —
(i) Describe the relationships among the quantities that are needed 
to find the answer.
(ii) Make reasonable assumptions and approximations if the required 
information is not available.
(iii) Compute and find the answer (and check how close your guess 
was).
Would the number of coins be in hundreds, thousands, lakhs, crores, or 
even more? Make an instinctive guess.
Find the answer by making necessary and 
reasonable assumptions and approximations for 
the unknowns. Remember, we are not looking for 
an exact answer but a reasonably close estimate.
Estu asks, “What if we use 5-rupee coins or 10-rupee notes instead? 
How much money could it be?”
Make an instinctive guess first. Then find out (make necessary and 
reasonable assumptions about the unknown details and find the 
answers).
Estu says, “When I become an adult, I would like to donate notebooks 
worth my weight every year”. Roxie says, “When I grow up, I would like 
to do annadāna (offering grains or meals) worth my weight every year”.
How many people might benefit from each of these offerings in a 
year? Again, guess first before finding out.
Roxie and Estu overheard someone saying—“We did pādayātra for 
about 400 km to reach this place! We arrived early this morning.”
How long ago would they have started their journey?
Find answers by making necessary assumptions and approximations. 
Do guess first before calculating to check how close your guess was!
How about measuring 
to find out the weight 
of a 1-rupee coin?
Initially, your guesses may be very far off from the answer and 
it is perfectly fine! You will get better at it like as you do it often 
and in different situations. Guessing and estimating can build 
intuition about numbers and various quantities.
Math 
Talk
Note to the Teacher: Assumptions can vary greatly at times, and as a result the 
answers computed using these you can also vary. This is perfectly alright. Modelling 
the situation properly is crucial, which can also be done in different ways sometimes. 
The accuracy of the assumed numbers or quantities can get better with exposure 
and practice.
Chapter 2.indd 34 7/10/2025 3:29:59 PM
Reprint 2026-27
