Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
36
 Analyse your observations. Did the lamp glow for all 
materials?
The lamp glows for some materials only. This means that 
electric current can pass easily through some materials but not 
through others. The materials through which electric current 
can fl ow easily are called good conductors, or conductors of 
electricity. The materials through which current cannot pass 
through are called insulators, or poor conductors of electricity. 
 Based on the observations you have recorded in Table 3.3, 
conclude which materials are conductors of electricity and 
which are insulators. Note it in Table 3.3.
From your conclusions in Table 3.3, you would have realised 
that metals are conductors of electricity, and thus, are used for 
making wires. 
Silver, copper, and gold are the best electrical conductors. 
However, for making electrical wires, mainly copper is used 
due to its comparatively lower cost and abundant supply. 
Diff erent types of electrical wires are used for diff erent uses.
DIVE
EEPER
From Table 3.3, you would have also realised that plastic, 
rubber, and ceramics are electrical insulators. Have you now 
understood why wires are covered with those materials?
Conductors and insulators are both important. Electrical 
wires, switches, connectors of plugs, and sockets are made of 
conductors. Insulators like rubber, plastics, and ceramics are 
used to cover wires, plug tops, and switches to protect people 
from electric shocks.
Caution — Our body is a conductor of electricity. Electric current 
passing through our body may cause severe injury or even death.
Always handle electrical appliances with care. Never touch switches or 
plugs with wet hands, or use electrical devices in wet areas, or handle 
equipment with damaged insulation or broken plugs.
Have you ever wondered how the electricity from a cell or 
battery is diff erent from the electricity coming from a wall 
socket? Electricity from batteries usually powers small 
devices and is of a type called Direct Current (DC). In contrast, 
the electricity from power plants that come to the wall socket 
is known as Alternating Current (AC) and can run larger 
appliances.
equipment with damaged insulation or broken plugs.
DIVE
EEPER
Chapter 3.indd 36 4/3/2025 4:51:43 PM
Reprint 2026-27
