91Tapestry of the Past 5 – The Rise of Empires
LET’S EXPLORE
Warfare apart, what other methods do you think the rulers 
might have used to expand their empires? Pen your ideas and 
share them with your class.
Trade , trade routes and guilds
Conducting military campaigns, especially in distant lands, is 
not as simple as it might seem. Maintaining an army is a costly 
affair: soldiers need to be fed, clothed, equipped with weapons, 
and paid; elephants and horses need to be cared for; roads or 
ships have to be built, and so on. All this requires considerable 
economic power, control over the workforce, and access 
to resources.
We can now understand that economic activity — especially 
production and trade — is one of the keys to maintaining an 
empire and ensuring people’s welfare and quality of life, which 
a good ruler should be concerned with. Therefore, establishing 
and controlling trade routes all over the empire’s territory 
and beyond is of great importance. That way, the goods traded 
will grow in quantity and variety, and more trade means more 
income for the producers and increased tax collections for 
the ruler. 
Returning to the case of ancient India, what would have been the 
traded goods? There is plenty of evidence on this, at least, both 
from the literature and archaeological excavations — textiles, 
spices, agricultural produce, luxury items such as gems and 
handicraft products, and various animals were among the main 
items of trade. All this brisk trade was not limited to India; many 
Indian goods travelled towards distant countries by land or sea.
More often than not, traders were not just isolated individuals 
carrying out their own business. They soon understood 
the benefits of joining forces and creating guilds (śhrenīs). 
Guilds were powerful associations of traders, craftsmen, 
moneylenders or agriculturists. As far as evidence shows, 
a guild had a head (who was usually elected) and executive 
Chapter 5.indd 91 08-04-2025 12:48:30
Reprint 2026-27
