How Forces Affect Motion 95
Fig. 6.3: (a) Pushing a box 
kept on table or floor
Force by hand
Force of friction
Fig. 6.2: Measuring the 
weight of an object using a 
spring balance
While learning about force earlier, did you notice that whenever any 
type of force acting on an object was described, its direction was also 
specified? For example, the phrases used were, force of friction acting on 
an object in a direction opposite to the direction of its motion; like poles of 
a magnet repelling each other or unlike poles attracting each other due to 
the magnetic force; like charges repelling or unlike charges attracting each 
other due to the electrostatic force; the Earth attracting objects towards 
itself due to the gravitational force; buoyant force exerted by liquid in an 
upward direction on an object placed in it, and so on. Force is a physical 
quantity for which we need to specify direction along with its magnitude
and unit, just like for the physical quantities — position, displacement, 
velocity and acceleration of an object which were introduced in Chapter 4. 
The SI unit of force is the newton (written with a small ‘n’) and its symbol 
is N. The magnitude of the force expresses its strength.
If either the magnitude or direction, or the both, of a force applied on an 
object changes, the effect of the force also changes.
Note
6.1.1 Measuring the magnitude of a force
How can we measure the magnitude of a force? Do you remember using 
a spring balance earlier to measure the weight of objects (Fig. 6.2)? Do you 
also remember that the weight of an object is the gravitational force with 
which the Earth pulls the object? A spring balance can be used to measure 
not just the weight of an object but the magnitude of the force in general. 
If you pull on the free end of the spring balance, it measures the force with 
which you pull on the spring inside the balance.
In everyday life, the smallest forces we can directly feel are of the order of 
millinewtons (10–3 N), such as a light touch. Scientists, however, can measure 
forces far smaller than this, down to yoctonewtons (10  
–24 N) in specialised 
experiments (as of 2026).
Threads of Curiosity
6.2 Balanced and Unbalanced Forces
In real life, situations seldom exist where only one force acts on an object. 
Usually, there is more than one force acting on an object. For example, when 
you are pushing a box placed on a surface then, apart from the force with 
which you are pushing it, the force of friction is also acting on the box in the 
direction opposite to that of the motion (Fig. 6.3a).
Or, take the example of a ball floating on water (Fig. 6.3b). Two forces 
are acting upon it — gravitational force by the Earth acting downwards and 
buoyant force applied by the liquid acting upwards. In such cases, what is 
the effect of forces when more than one force is acting on an object at rest 
or in motion? 
Have you ever played a game of tug of war where two teams pull at 
a rope in opposite directions? If both the teams pull the rope with equal 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Fig. 6.3: (b) A ball 
floating on water
Buoyant force
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 4
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Gravitational 
force
Chapter-06.indd 95 28-04-2026 15:47:39
