96 Exploration|Grade 9
force, the rope does not move 
(Fig. 6.4a). Such two forces, which 
are equal in magnitude but opposite 
in direction are called balanced 
forces. However, if one team pulls 
harder, i.e., it applies a force of 
larger magnitude, the forces are 
no longer balanced and the rope 
moves in the direction of the larger 
force (Fig. 6.4b). The rope does not 
move if the forces applied on it are 
balanced but moves if the forces are 
unbalanced.
If the forces applied on an object are not balanced, a non-zero net force
acts on the object. When two forces are opposite in direction but unequal in 
magnitude (Fig. 6.4b), the magnitude of net force is equal to the difference 
between the magnitudes of two forces and the direction is along the force 
of the larger magnitude.
Now, think of a situation where two people are 
applying forces in the same direction on a stalled car 
to make it move (Fig. 6.5). In this case, the magnitude 
of the net force applied by them on the car is the sum 
of the magnitudes of two forces. The direction of the 
net force is in the same direction as the two individual 
forces.
Example 6.1: Two forces of 10 N and 6 N are acting on a block lying on the 
table as shown in Fig. 6.6. What is the magnitude and the direction of the 
net force acting on the block in each case?
Fig. 6.6: Two forces acting on a block in three different manner
10 N
6 N
(a)
10 N 6 N
(b)
6 N 10 N
(c)
Answer:
(a) Net force = 10 N + 6 N = 16 N, acting towards the right side.
(b) Net force = 10 N – 6 N = 4 N, acting towards the right side.
(c) Net force = 10 N – 6 N = 4 N, acting towards the left side.
There are situations in which forces do not act parallel or 
opposite to each other but act at an angle to each other. You 
will learn in higher grades how to calculate the net force 
in such cases. Also, there are situations where equal and 
opposite forces are applied to the two ends of an extended 
object which make the object rotate (Fig. 6.7). For example, 
applying equal and opposite forces to a handlebar or a tap 
makes it turn. You will also learn about this in higher grades.
Ready to Go Beyond
Fig. 6.7: Equal and opposite 
forces on an extended object
Next
Level
Up
(a)
Fig. 6.4: Two forces applied in opposite direction of (a) equal
magnitudes, (b) unequal magnitudes
(b)
Net force
Fig. 6.5: Two forces applied in the same direction
Net force
Chapter-06.indd 96 28-04-2026 15:47:40
