How Forces Affect Motion 97
6.3 The Force of Friction: Often 
Overlooked but Always Present 
You have learnt about the force of friction in an 
earlier grade but now let us learn more about it. 
Suppose an object is kept at rest on the floor and 
you apply a force on it in the forward direction (Fig. 6.10). 
Will the force applied by you make the object move? Many 
a times, you might have experienced that on applying a 
force on an object, it did not move and you had to apply a 
larger force to move it. Why is it so?
It is due to the force of friction arising between the 
bottom surface of the box and the floor acting in a direction 
opposite to the direction of the force applied by you. The 
box will start moving when the force applied by you is of 
larger magnitude than the force of friction, so that a net 
force acts on the box in the direction of its motion. 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
For an object being pushed, apart from the applied force and 
the force of friction, some other forces may also be acting on 
it (Fig. 6.11). One of these is the gravitational force (weight) 
and the other is the force exerted by the surface on which it is 
placed called the normal force. The weight acts in the downwards 
direction, whereas the normal force acts in the upward direction 
perpendicular to the surface. However, the two forces are balanced.
Air around the object also exerts a force of friction on the 
box when the box moves through the air, but in many cases its 
magnitude is so small that it can be neglected.
Ready to Go Beyond
Applied 
force
Gravitational 
force
Normal force
Force of friction
Fig. 6.11: Forces acting on an object
For the situation shown in Fig. 6.10, once the box starts moving and you 
stop applying the force on it, the box slows down and comes to a stop. You 
must have experienced this in many cases around you. You stop pedalling 
a bicycle and after some time it comes to rest after travelling some distance. 
You stop pushing a ball and it also comes to rest after travelling some 
distance. Does it mean that you need to continuously apply a force to keep 
Fig. 6.10: A box being pushed
Net force
1. A weightlifter lifts a barbell (Fig. 6.8). List 
two forces that are acting on the barbell. Are 
these forces balanced if the weightlifter keeps 
the barbell steady? 
2. Two players R and S are participating in an 
arm-wrestling match (Fig. 6.9). At the instant, 
when the arms tilt to the front direction 
(out of the page towards you), are the forces 
exerted by the players balanced? If not, which 
player exerted the larger force?
Pause and Ponder
Fig. 6.8: A weightlifter 
lifting barbell
Fig. 6.9: Arm-wrestling 
match
R S
Multiple forces may act on an 
object, but its motion depends 
only on the net force.
Note
Chapter-06.indd 97 28-04-2026 15:47:41
