98 Exploration|Grade 9
it moving? On a moving object, we have to continuously apply a force to 
counter the force of friction. Otherwise, the force of friction acting against 
the direction of motion brings the object to rest.
Do you remember doing an activity in an earlier grade where 
you found that the force of friction depends upon the nature of 
the surfaces in contact? Let us carry out a similar activity here.
Activity 6.1: Let us investigate
1. Collect four coins of ` 10, one large strong rubber band and an adhesive 
tape. Locate horizontal surfaces of different materials, such as wooden 
table top, cemented floor, laminated table top, and polished marble 
or tiled floor (you may also choose other surfaces). Check that the 
surfaces are level.
2. Stack the four coins on top of each other and secure them together 
with an adhesive tape around the sides.
3. Hold the rubber band slightly stretched between your forefinger and 
thumb on the wooden table top (Fig. 6.12a). Mark points A and B at its 
ends as shown in Fig. 6.12b. Make another mark C up to which you will 
stretch the rubber band.
Fig. 6.12: (a) Rubber band slightly stretched between your forefinger and thumb, (b) marks A, B, C 
on the surface, and (c) rubber band stretched back to point C with stack of 4 coins
(a) (b) (c)
 C
A B A B
C
4. Holding the ends of the rubber band at A and B, place the stack of coins 
near the middle of A and B. Now, using a finger of your other hand, 
push back the stack of coins till the rubber band is pulled back to the 
mark C (Fig. 6.12c). Then, release the stack of coins and observe its 
motion. Do you find that after losing contact with the rubber band, the 
velocity of the stack of coins decreases gradually and it comes to rest 
after travelling some distance? Measure the distance travelled from C 
and record it. Repeat this step twice. 
5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 for laminated table top while ensuring that the 
points A, B and C are marked at the same distances as earlier. Does 
the stack of coins travel a larger distance than it did on the wooden 
table top before coming to rest? Does its velocity decrease more 
slowly now?
6. Next, repeat step 5 on a horizontal polished marble or tile floor. 
Does the stack of coins travel an even larger distance and its velocity 
decrease even more slowly? What conclusion do you draw from your 
observations?
Before you release the stack of coins, it is stationary. It means that the 
forces acting upon it are balanced. Upon release, the force applied by you 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
What if ...
the force 
of friction 
disappears in 
the world? How 
will the motion 
of objects be 
impacted?
Chapter-06.indd 98 28-04-2026 15:47:41
