How Forces Affect Motion 99
Fig. 6.13: Force acting on the stack of 
coins (a) due to the stretched rubber 
band and friction upon release of rubber 
band, and (b) only due to friction
(a)
(b)
Force of friction
B
B
Force of friction
Force due to 
rubber band
vanishes and the force applied by the stretched rubber 
band in the forward direction on the stack of coins sets 
it moving. The coins start moving means that the force 
applied by the rubber band is larger than the force of 
friction and a net force acts on stack of coins in the forward 
direction (Fig. 6.13a). Due to the net force, the velocity of 
stack of coins changes from zero to a certain value, i.e., 
the net force provides an acceleration in the forward 
direction.
However, the moment the stack of coins loses contact 
with the rubber band, the force due to the rubber band is 
no longer acting upon it. But the force of friction continues 
to act upon the stack of coins in the direction opposite to 
their motion (Fig. 6.13b). It gradually decreases its velocity 
and finally brings it to rest. 
Even though the rubber band is stretched by the same amount in each 
case, the distance travelled by the stack of coins on different surfaces 
changes. This indicates that the force of friction on these surfaces is 
different. But how can you check if the force of friction is indeed different 
for different surfaces?
Activity 6.2: Let us measure
1. Take a spring balance and a wooden block.
2. Place the spring balance in a horizontal position on one of the surfaces 
used in Activity 6.1 and check that its scale reading is zero. Attach the 
wooden block to the hook of the spring balance as shown in Fig. 6.14.
Fig. 6.14: A block being pulled by a spring balance
3. Pull the spring balance with gradually increasing force and note down 
the reading on it when the block just starts moving. What does this 
reading indicate? The forces acting on the block are the force applied 
by the spring on it and the force of friction. If the velocity of the block 
is neither increasing nor decreasing, what can you say about the net 
force acting on the block? Does the reading of the spring balance 
indicate the magnitude of the force of friction acting on the wooden 
block?
4. Now repeat step 3 on the remaining three surfaces from Activity 6.1. 
5. Compare the readings of the spring balance for all surfaces. Are the 
readings different? Is the reading smallest for the surface on which the 
stack of coins travelled the largest distance? Is the reading largest for 
which the distance travelled was the smallest?
The reading of the spring balance gives an approximate measure of the 
force of friction acting between the surface of the block and the surface 
A
A
Chapter-06.indd 99 04-05-2026 16:42:43
