100 Exploration|Grade 9
on which it moves. A smaller reading indicates a smaller force of friction, 
while a larger reading indicates a larger force of friction. From Activities 6.1 
and 6.2, we conclude that when the force of friction is smaller, the velocity 
of the stack of coins decreases more slowly, and it travels a larger distance 
before coming to rest.
Now, conduct a thought experiment. We do a thought experiment when the conditions required 
for the experiment are difficult to recreate in the real world. Suppose, you find an object and 
a horizontal floor having such smooth surfaces that the force of friction between them is zero. 
Imagine, what will happen if you repeat steps 3 and 4 of Activity 6.1 with such an object and a 
horizontal floor? Will the velocity of the object decrease? Will the object ever come to rest or 
continue moving forever?
Think as a Scientist
Meet a Scientist
In ancient times, it was 
well recognised that a 
force was required to 
move a stationary object 
or to stop a moving 
object. But was a force 
required to keep an object moving 
with a constant velocity? For ages, it 
was mistakenly thought that a force 
was indeed required to maintain an 
object in such a motion. It was only in 
the 17th century that Galileo Galilei
argued through a series of thought 
experiments that if a body moves along 
a horizontal plane and all impediments 
to its motion are removed, it will 
continue to move indefinitely.
Meet a Scientist
Isaac Newton used the 
word ‘inertia’ to describe 
the tendency of objects 
to resist change in their 
state of rest or uniform 
motion, and used this 
idea to frame his first 
law of motion. Along with this, Newton 
presented two more laws of motion in 
1687. The formulation of these three 
laws of motion was a defining moment 
in the history of science. The unit of force 
is named after Newton. Remember that 
when a unit is named after a person, 
its full form begins with the small case 
(newton and not Newton) while its 
symbol is capitalised (N and not n).
6.4 Newton’s First Law of Motion
Newton’s first law of motion can be stated as:
An object at rest remains at rest, and an object in motion continues to move 
with a constant velocity, unless a net force acts upon the object.
In other words, we can say that if the net force acting on an object is 
zero, the body cannot begin to move or change its velocity. In such a case, 
its acceleration is zero.
An object at rest means that it has zero velocity. Remember that constant 
velocity means that there is no change in the magnitude or the direction of 
velocity. If this constant velocity is non-zero, the motion is in a straight line in 
the same direction and the magnitude of velocity remains the same. 
Note
Chapter-06.indd 100 28-04-2026 15:47:42
