How Forces Affect Motion 101
Example 6.2: A person is exerting a force on a moving box in the 
forward direction which is equal to the force of friction acting between 
the bottom surface of the box and the floor. Will the box continue 
moving or will it come to rest after some time? 
Answer: The force of friction will be acting on the box in the backward 
direction. The two forces acting on the box are equal and opposite, 
and thus, they balance each other. The net force acting on the box is 
zero and as per the Newton’s first law of motion, the box will continue 
moving with constant velocity. 
Example 6.3: Draw (i) position-time, and (ii) velocity-time graphs for 
an object on which no net force is acting.
Answer: When no net force is acting on an object, there are two 
possibilities — either the object is at rest or the object is moving 
with a constant velocity. If the object is at rest, its position will 
not change with time and its position-time graph is as shown in 
Fig. 6.15a. Its velocity will remain zero and its velocity-time graph 
is shown in Fig. 6.15b. If the object is moving with constant velocity 
and no net force is acting upon it, it will continue moving with the 
same velocity and the velocity-time graph is shown in Fig. 6.16b. The
position-time graph will be a straight line as shown in Fig. 6.16a.
(a) (b)
Fig. 6.15: When the object is at rest, its 
(a) position-time graph, 
(b) velocity-time graph
(a) (b)
Fig. 6.16: When the object is moving with 
a constant velocity, its (a) position-time 
graph, (b) velocity-time graph
0 Time
Position
Velocity
0 Time 0 Time Velocity
Time
Position
0
3. An object is moving with a constant velocity. Is there a net force acting upon it?
4. Suppose, no net force is acting on an object. Which of the following situations 
are possible?
(i) Object remains at rest if at rest. 
(ii) Object keeps moving with a constant velocity if already moving.
(iii) Object is moving with a constant acceleration.
5. In the real world, it is difficult to find a situation where no forces are acting on an 
object. But by applying additional forces, a condition can be achieved where the net 
force on the object is zero. Explain with the help of an example. 
Pause and Ponder
Newton’s first law of motion describes the motion of objects in the 
absence of a net force. It is natural to ask what happens to the motion 
of an object when there is a net force acting upon it. Newton’s second 
law of motion addresses this issue.
Note
If the force of 
friction is zero, a 
net force will have 
to be applied to 
an object at rest to 
set it moving. But 
once the object 
is moving, no 
further force is 
required to keep 
it moving with a 
constant velocity. 
However, to 
change the velocity 
(magnitude or 
direction), or to 
stop a moving 
object, a force will 
have to be applied.
Chapter-06.indd 101 28-04-2026 15:47:42
