102 Exploration|Grade 9
6.5 Newton’s Second Law of Motion
You know that a force can set an object in motion, bring it to rest, or change 
its velocity. A change in velocity means that the object is accelerating. Thus, 
a force produces acceleration. But what is the relationship between the net 
force acting on an object and its acceleration?
From our everyday experiences, you know that if a ball is pushed gently, it moves slowly starting 
from rest, i.e., the acceleration due to the force applied by you is small. On the other hand, a 
strong push results in the ball starting to move fast, i.e., a larger acceleration due to the force 
applied by you. So based on your experiences, you can make a hypothesis — for the same object, 
a larger force results in larger acceleration (or a smaller force results in smaller acceleration). 
Now, how can you test your hypothesis? You will have to think of an activity where you can apply 
forces of different magnitudes on the same object and the same surface to find the resultant 
acceleration. How can you apply forces of different magnitudes? You have learnt in 
earlier grade about gravitational force with which the Earth pulls an object towards 
itself. It is called the weight of an object and is different for different objects. Hence, 
you can use weights of different magnitudes to apply forces of different magnitudes. 
Think as a Scientist
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Activity 6.3: Let us experiment 
(Demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a 
classroom group activity facilitated by the teacher.
1. Take four ball bearing wheels, two pencils, 
an empty cardboard box (to make a cart), a 
paper cup, a piece of pipe (to use as a pulley), 
a length of thread, some coins or other 
objects (to place in cup) and a weighing scale 
to measure mass.
2. Insert two pencils through the sides of the box 
near the bottom, to function as axles and attach 
a wheel to each of their free ends as shown in 
Fig. 6.17a (if the wheels are loose, wrap some 
adhesive tape at the pencil ends to fit the wheels 
tightly). Attach a thread to the front end of the 
box with which you can pull the cart.
3. Draw a line at one end of the table, which will mark the starting point 
for the cart. Put the thread over a small pipe attached at the other end 
of the table (Fig. 6.17b). To this thread attach a cup in which you can 
put some objects. As you let the system go, the cup will move down due 
to the gravitational force by the Earth on it, and the thread will pull the 
cart with a constant force. 
4. Measure the mass of the cup along with any other objects put inside it 
with the weighing scale.
5. Start recording a video of the cart in slow motion. Release the cart from 
the start line, and record the video until it reaches the pipe at the other 
end of the table.
Fig. 6.17: (a) A cart, (b) a cart and 
pulley system
(a)
(b)
Wheels
Cart
Cardboard 
box
Paper 
cup
Paper 
cup
Pencils
Thread Pulley
Chapter-06.indd 102 28-04-2026 15:47:43
