How Forces Affect Motion 103
6. Read the time when you released the cart and when it reached the end
of the table by seeing the slow-motion video, and record the difference
as time T1
.
7. Now double the mass of the cup with the objects inside it, and repeat
steps 5 and 6 to record the time difference T2
.
Using the values of the time measured, let us do some analysis. For both 
cases, the cart starts with zero velocity u = 0 and travels the same distance s. 
If a1
 and a2
 are the accelerations in the two cases respectively, using 
kinematic equation, we obtain
s aT = 2
11
1
2 and 2
22
1
2
s aT =
Equating the two equations, we obtain
aT
aT =
2
12
2
21
Substituting the values of T1
 and T2 , you find that when you increased 
the force for the same mass of the cart, the acceleration increased.
You may conclude that the acceleration of an object of fixed mass 
increases as the net force applied on it increases.
Apart from force, does acceleration depends on any other factor? From everyday experiences, 
you know that with the same magnitude of force, it is easier to set lighter objects in motion 
than heavier ones. This leads to a second hypothesis, that for the same force, a smaller mass 
has a larger acceleration (or a larger mass has a smaller acceleration). Now how can you test 
your second hypothesis? 
Think as a Scientist
Activity 6.4: Let us experiment (Demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a classroom group activity 
facilitated by the teacher.
1. Repeat Activity 6.3 with a variation. Keep the mass of the cup and objects
inside it constant. Double the mass of the cart by adding more objects in it.
2. Measure the mass of the cart along with the objects inside it with a
weighing scale.
3. Carry out steps 5 and 6 of Activity 6.3.
Using the values of time measured, find the ratio of acceleration for
these two cases. Do you find that for the same force, when you increased 
the mass of the cart, the acceleration decreased? This means that for a given 
magnitude of a force, the acceleration produced is inversely related to the 
mass of the object. 
The relation between force, mass and acceleration is expressed in the 
Newton’s second law, one of the most fundamental ideas in all of science. 
Newton’s second law of motion can be stated as:
When a net force acts on an object, the object accelerates in the direction 
of the net force. The magnitude of the acceleration is proportional to the 
magnitude of the net force and is inversely proportional to the mass of 
the object.
Chapter-06.indd 103 28-04-2026 15:47:43
