104 Exploration|Grade 9
Mathematically it can be expressed as
   = F
a
m
(6.1)
 or   F = ma (6.2)
where a denotes acceleration, F denotes force, and m denotes mass 
of the object. The direction of acceleration is the same as the direction 
of net force.
You know that the SI units of mass and acceleration are kg and m s–2
respectively. If m = 1 kg , a = 1 m s–2, then using Eq. (6.2) we obtain 
F = (1 kg) × (1 m s–2) = 1 kg m s–2 = 1 N
One newton of force is defined as the force that produces an 
acceleration of 1 m s–2 on an object of mass 1 kg.
You know that under the influence of gravitational force, an object 
falls towards the Earth. During this motion, the acceleration involved 
is called the acceleration due to the gravitational force by the Earth
and is denoted by g. Its unit is the same as that of acceleration, m s–2. 
Using Eq. (6.2), the gravitational force acting on an object of mass m is 
F = mg (6.3)
The value of acceleration due to gravitational force by the Earth is 
g = 9.8 m s–2. It can be taken to be nearly constant near the surface of 
the Earth. For quick estimations, one can also take g = 10 m s–2.
Threads of Curiosity
As per Eq. (6.1), in Activity 6.3, doubling the force on the cart should have doubled the acceleration 
you measured. But in reality, you may have found the increase to be little less than a factor of two.
Similarly in Activity 6.4, when you doubled the mass of the cart, the acceleration should have been 
halved but you might have found a slightly different value. Apart from measurement errors, the 
friction between the cart’s wheels and the surface can lead to such differences.
The more complete form of Newton’s second law is expressed in terms of momentum. The 
momentum of an object is defined as the product of its mass and velocity. The direction of the 
momentum is same as that of the velocity. Newton’s second law states that the rate of change of 
momentum of an object is proportional to the net force and takes place in the direction in which 
the net force acts. Newton’s second law expressed in this form is applicable to situations even 
where the mass of the object is not constant.
Ready to Go Beyond
Newton’s second law of motion is considered to be a fundamental 
law of nature. Many events around us can be explained on the basis of 
Newton’s second law of motion. 
In a game of cricket, you might have noticed that while catching 
a fast-moving ball, the fielder gradually pulls their hands backwards 
with the moving ball just after catching it (Fig. 6.18). In doing so, the 
time duration is increased during which the high velocity of the ball 
reduces to zero. This reduces the magnitude of the acceleration of the Fig. 6.18: Catching a 
cricket ball 
How much does a 
force of 1 N feel? If 
you hold a 100 g mass 
in your palm, the 
upward force your 
palm applies on the 
mass is around 1 N. 
Threads of 
Curiosity
The acceleration due 
to gravitational force 
by the Earth ( g) does 
not depend on the 
mass of the object.
Note
Chapter-06.indd 104 28-04-2026 15:47:44
