How Forces Affect Motion 107
6.6 Newton’s Third Law of Motion
We have described the behaviour of an object when a net 
force acts on it. But do you remember learning earlier that at 
least two objects must interact for a force to come into play? 
Haven’t you experienced that when you push a ball with your 
foot, you feel a force applied by the ball on your foot (Fig. 6.22)? It is 
then natural to ask how both the objects are affected in this process. 
Newton’s third law addresses this issue.
Activity 6.5: Let us explore
1. Locate a chair with wheels and a large heavy table.
2. Sit on the chair with your legs raised above the floor. Now, using 
both your hands, push the table away from you, i.e., apply a 
force on the table in the forward direction as shown in Fig. 6.23a. 
What happens to you? Does the chair you are sitting upon move 
in the opposite direction?
3. Now, try to pull the table towards you, i.e., apply a force on the 
table in the direction opposite to that in step 2 (Fig. 6.23b). In 
which direction does your chair move now?
What conclusion can you draw from this activity? Each time, when 
you applied a force on the table, the table applied a force upon you 
in the opposite direction. You may have experienced this in various 
other situations.
If you are sitting on a bicycle and you want to move forward 
without pedalling, what do you do (Fig. 6.24)? You push the ground 
in the backward direction with your feet causing both you and the 
bicycle to move forward. This is because your feet apply a force on 
the ground and the ground applies a force on your feet in the opposite 
direction. This causes you to move forward along with the bicycle. 
In fact, this is how you walk or run. Notice what you do while 
walking or running. You push the ground backwards with your feet 
(Fig. 6.25). The ground applies an opposite force on your feet to make 
you move forward. The force applied by the ground is in the form 
of friction. Thus, in this case friction helps you move rather than 
oppose you.
Bridging Science and Society
While walking or running when you push the ground backwards 
with your foot, i.e., when your foot tries to slide backwards, the force 
of friction acts in the forward direction. Had there been no force of 
friction, your foot would have slipped backwards while attempting to 
push the ground and you would have fallen down. Grooves are made 
on the soles of footwear to increase the force of friction between the 
floor and soles. Similarly, treads on tyres of vehicles help increase 
the force of friction between the tyres and the road. You can now 
understand, why it is difficult to walk on wet polished floors or ice, or 
why it is risky to drive on roads covered with water or snow.
Fig. 6.22: Kicking a ball
Fig. 6.23: Applying force on a 
table in the (a) forward direction, 
(b) reverse direction
(b)
Force applied 
by the girl on 
the table
Force applied 
by the table on 
the girl
Force applied 
by the girl on 
the table
Force applied 
by the table on 
the girl
(a)
Fig. 6.24: Pushing the ground 
backwards
Ground pushing the 
rider along with the 
bicycle forward
Feet pushing 
the ground 
backwards
Fig. 6.25: Walking
Foot 
pushing 
the ground 
backwards
Force of 
friction 
pushing 
the person 
forward
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Chapter-06.indd 107 28-04-2026 15:47:45
