108 Exploration|Grade 9
It was found experimentally that the magnitudes of such two forces 
are equal. Can you also observe this in some other way? You know how to 
measure the magnitude of the force using a spring balance.
Activity 6.6: Let us verify
1. Take two identical spring balances.
2. Place them in horizontal position on a table and connect them by 
their hooks as shown in Fig. 6.26. Fix the free end of one of the spring 
balances to an immovable object or hold it fixed by your hand.
3. Imagine that you are pulling the free end of the other spring balance 
with your other hand. Predict what will be the readings of their scales 
if the spring balances are stationary.
4. Now, carry out step 3. Repeat it multiple times by varying the 
magnitude of the force applied by you. Is your observation same as 
your prediction?
Fig. 6.26: Two spring balances connected together are pulled in opposite directions
The readings of the scales of two spring balances are the same every 
time. What does it indicate? 
It indicates that the forces applied by them on each other in the opposite 
direction are equal in magnitude.
All these observations are summed up in the Newton’s third law of 
motion, which can be stated as:
Whenever one object is exerting a force on a second object, 
the second object is simultaneously exerting an equal and 
opposite force on the first object.
The forces always occur in pairs but remember that these two 
forces act on two different objects.
Note
Many daily life observations can be understood on the 
basis of the Newton’s third law of motion. You might have seen 
a person climbing a coconut tree or palm tree (Fig. 6.27). The 
legs of the person climbing the vertically erect tree push down 
against the trunk. The friction between the trunk and the legs 
of the person pushes the person upwards by an equal force. 
Thus, it is harder to climb up the smooth tree trunks that have 
lesser friction.
Have you ever noticed how a boat or a canoe moves forward 
(Fig. 6.28)? When the canoeist pushes the water backwards 
with their paddle, the water pushes the paddle forward with 
an equal force. The two forces are equal in magnitude but act 
on different objects, the paddle and the water, so they do not 
cancel each other. The force on the paddle makes the paddle 
and the canoe move forward. When the canoeist pushes harder 
on the water, the forward force on the paddle is larger, and the 
canoe’s velocity increases.
Fig. 6.28: Rowing a canoe
Paddle pushing 
water backwards
Water pushing the 
paddle and canoe 
forward
Fig. 6.27: A person climbing a 
coconut tree
Person 
pushing the 
trunk down
Force of 
friction 
pushing a 
person up
Chapter-06.indd 108 28-04-2026 15:47:46
