How Forces Affect Motion 109
Threads of Curiosity
Apart from how hard one paddles, there are several other factors (drag, 
water currents, mass of the canoe, style of rowing, etc.) which impact the 
speed of a canoe. 
On television, you might have watched the rocket launches our country 
has done over the years. The launch of a rocket can also be explained on the 
basis of the Newton’s third law of motion. To understand that, let us first do 
a fun activity.
Activity 6.7: Let us understand
1. Collect a large balloon, a piece of drinking straw, adhesive tape, a long 
thread, and two nails or hooks on two walls.
2. Inflate the balloon and tie its neck with a small piece of thread.
3. Stick the piece of straw with an adhesive tape on the surface of the 
balloon such that, one end of the straw points towards the neck of the 
balloon, as shown in Fig. 6.29.
4. Pass the thread through the straw and tie its two ends to the nails, 
keeping the thread taut (Fig. 6.29).
5. Remove the thread tied to the neck of the balloon and observe in which 
direction the straw and the balloon move.
Fig. 6.29: Air rushing out of the balloon
Straw
Air
Balloon
The stretched material of the balloon applies a force on the air molecules 
inside to expel them as it shrinks in size. The air rushing out exerts an equal 
force on the balloon material in the opposite direction. This force causes 
the balloon to start moving in a direction opposite to the direction in which 
the air is rushing out.
A rocket moves in a similar manner (Fig. 6.30). Its engine produces gas 
and expels it in the downward direction, which in turn exerts an equal 
and opposite force on the rocket in the upward direction. This force on the 
rocket in the upward direction is larger than the weight of the rocket, so the 
net force is in the upward direction and the rocket lifts off.
What will happen if the engine of a rocket moving in the space, fires in the 
direction of its motion? The exhaust gases will exert a force in the direction 
opposite to the direction of motion of the rocket, thereby slowing it down. This 
process was used by the Vikram lander of Chandrayaan-3 to slow down and 
attain the necessary velocity for a soft landing near the south pole of the Moon.
The pair of equal and opposite forces (as per the Newton’s third law of 
motion) acts on two different objects, thus, they do not balance each other. On 
the other hand, if two equal and opposite forces act on the same object, they 
balance each other.
Note
Exhaust gas 
pushing the 
rocket up
Rocket engine 
expelling gas 
downwards
Fig. 6.30: Rocket 
launching
Chapter-06.indd 109 28-04-2026 15:47:46
