How Forces Affect Motion 111
6.7 Forces Acting on a System of Objects
Until now, you studied the three laws of Newton as applied to a single 
object. These laws allowed you to predict the position and velocities of the 
object as forces act on it. But can we apply these laws to two or more objects 
connected together? 
Consider two boxes of masses m1
 and m2
 placed on a frictionless 
horizontal surface and connected by a string (Fig. 6.34). A force F pulls 
Box 1 to the right. Box 1 applies a force on Box 2 via the string. By Newton’s 
third law, Box 2 applies an equal and opposite force via the string on Box 1. 
We call this force tension T. On Box 1, the force F acts to the right, while 
the tension force T acts to the left. On Box 2, the tension force T acts on the 
right. How can we find the acceleration of each box?
Fig. 6.34: A system of two boxes attached together by a string
Box 2
T F
Box 1
One approach is to calculate the net force on each box separately and 
then use Newton’s second law to find acceleration. A simpler way is to 
consider the two boxes and the string as a single system. In this approach, 
the forces within the system (internal forces) need not be considered 
and only forces that act from the outside (external forces) matter. In our 
case, the tension T acting on both the boxes is the internal force, while the 
force F is the external force. Thus, using Newton’s second law (Eq. 6.1) the 
acceleration of the system is 
 mass of the system ( ) 12
= = +
FF
a
mm
(6.4)
The system of two boxes accelerates just like a single object of mass m1
 + m2
.
If you had analysed the motion of the two boxes individually as you will 
learn to do in higher grades, the result would have been the same. Treating 
connected objects as a system often simplifies the analysis. This highlights 
the power of Newton’s laws in studying even complicated systems of objects.
In addition to F, the external forces will be gravitational 
force (m1 g + m2 g) acting on the system downwards, which is 
balanced by the normal force (N1
 + N2 ) acting on the system 
from the ground (Fig. 6.35).
Fig. 6.35: External forces on a system of two 
boxes attached together by a string
Box 2
N1
 + N2
(m1+ m2
)g
Box 1
F
Ready to Go Beyond
While walking, your 
arms and legs move 
in a complex manner. 
Yet your overall 
motion can be studied 
by treating your body 
as a single object. 
Science often becomes 
simpler when we stop 
looking at parts and 
start looking at the 
whole.
Threads of 
Curiosity
Next
Level
Up
Chapter-06.indd 111 28-04-2026 15:47:48
