How Forces Affect Motion 115
In the real world, friction is always present whenever surfaces are in contact. 
Scientists have been trying to find ways to reduce friction between surfaces 
by using lubricants, coatings or texturing of surfaces, streamlining shapes of 
objects, and by using magnetic levitation. 
The Quest Continues…
y You know that the force of friction depends on the nature of the 
surfaces in contact. Does it also depend on how hard the surfaces 
press each other? Is the friction acting on an object that is about to 
move larger than the friction after motion begins? Is the friction 
which acts on a rolling object less than that on a sliding object? 
Find answers to these questions and create an infographic. Such 
observations help explain why the invention of the wheel was a 
major milestone in human history. 
y Take two toy cars of equal mass and stick a bar magnet on top of 
each (Fig. 6.32). Fix a metre scale on a smooth surface. Place the cars 
near the midpoint of the metre scale with the like poles touching. 
Release the cars and record the time taken (using two stopwatches), 
and distance travelled by each before coming to a rest. Repeat 
the experiment after adding equal masses to both cars. Did the 
cars travel equal distances in opposite directions? Plot a graph of 
distance travelled versus mass. Analyse and discuss your findings.
y Wrap a rope once around a rough tree branch or post. Attach 
a heavy bucket to one end and try to hold it by the other end 
(Fig. 6.43). Now, add one more turn of the rope and repeat. You will 
find that each extra turn increases the ‘grip’ between the rope and 
the branch, increasing the friction and reducing the force required, 
making it much easier to hold the same load. The reduction in 
effort is much larger than you might expect from just adding one 
turn. This shows that friction does not increase in a simple linear 
way, small changes in contact can lead to large changes in force. In 
the same way, friction between a rope and a post allows large ships 
to be held safely at a pier. 
y It is often instructive to examine how scientific ideas develop over 
time. If you are interested, explore how Newton formulated the 
laws of motion by reading excerpts from his original work, the 
Principia. Both the original text and commentaries are available 
online.
Newton’s laws describe motion across an enormous range of scales, from 
everyday objects to planets and stars. They need modification only very 
close to massive objects, at extremely high speeds near the speed of light, 
and very small (atomic) scales.
Ready to Go Beyond
Fig. 6.43
The Journey Beyond
Chapter-06.indd 115 28-04-2026 15:47:52
