2 Exploration|Grade 9
The natural world is complex, and studying it in full detail is often 
impossible. To make sense of this complexity, science uses models. These 
are simplified ways of looking at real systems that focus only on what 
is most important for a given question. In physics, a moving car may be 
represented as a single point, while in chemistry, atoms and molecules 
are drawn as spheres and bonds. In biology, cells are shown as diagrams 
highlighting key parts, and in earth science, the Earth may be treated 
as a smooth sphere layered into distinct regions. Building such models 
involves making assumptions and deliberately ignoring certain details. For 
example, when studying the motion of a falling object, air resistance may 
be neglected to understand the basic effect of gravity. In biology, when 
studying how the heart pumps blood, many individual cells are ignored 
so that the organ can be understood as a functioning system. Remember 
that these choices are not mistakes, they are done on purpose to keep 
things simple enough, but still allow us to find answers to what we are 
looking for.
Example 1.1: A cricket shot. Think of a cricket ball being hit for 
a six. You want to make a simple model. What details would you 
include? What would you ignore?
Answer: We must ask, “Will the ball cross the boundary without 
hitting the ground first?”. For this, things like the brand of the 
bat, the colour of the ball, the amount of grass on the field will 
make no difference. On the other hand, the mass of the ball, 
and the speed and direction in which it has been hit will be 
very important. Air resistance, the spin of the ball, and the 
stitching of the threads at the seam have smaller effects that 
can be ignored in a simple model. As we build more and more 
complex models, we add extra details for greater accuracy. 
Activity 1.1: Let us model
Suppose you ride a bicycle from your school to your home. You 
want to model the time it takes to go home from school. What 
details would you keep? What details could you ignore? Suggest 
why ignoring some details may actually be useful.
As you explore science more deeply, you will notice that it 
uses language in a very careful and precise way. Many words 
that we use in everyday life, such as force, work, cell, or reaction, 
have specific meanings in science. These meanings are often 
very specific because scientific ideas must be communicated 
clearly and unambiguously. To allow scientists across the world 
to describe observations, compare results, and build ideas 
together, science uses a shared language of these specific terms, 
symbols, and units. Quantities, such as mass, velocity, force, and 
electric current are represented by symbols like m, v, F, and I, 
each associated with a defined unit. 
To make this even more precise, science often turns to 
mathematics to allow relationships between quantities to be 
expressed clearly and tested carefully. This can sometimes feel 
Meet a Scientist
Simplifying the stars:
Science often begins by 
ignoring details. When 
physicist Meghnad Saha
studied the light from stars, 
he did not try to model 
every atom, every reaction, 
or every movement inside a 
star. Instead, he treated the 
matter in the star as a hot 
gas, ignored many complex 
processes, and focused only 
on temperature, pressure, 
and how atoms formed 
ions. This simplification 
allowed him to explain 
how the colour of stars is 
deeply connected to their 
temperature.
Meghnad Saha on an 
Indian postage stamp
Chapter-01.indd 2 28-04-2026 14:35:57
