Exploration: Entering the World of Secondary Science 3
challenging, but it is important to remember that mathematics 
in science is not meant to be a hurdle. Instead, it is a language 
that helps us think more clearly about the world. An equation 
is not just a calculation tool, it is a compact statement about 
how certain things are related. For example, describing 
motion using quantities, such as distance, time, and velocity 
allows us to answer questions about where an object will 
be at a later moment. In the same way, mathematical 
expressions are used to describe rates of chemical reactions, 
patterns of population growth, or changes in energy within 
a system. Learning to use mathematics in science does not 
mean memorising equations. It means understanding the 
situation first, identifying relevant quantities, and then using 
mathematical relationships to reason carefully. In this way, 
mathematics becomes a powerful language for thinking, 
not just for finding numerical answers. If you focus first on 
understanding the situation and the quantities involved, 
equations will begin to feel less like obstacles and more like 
helpful guides in your exploration of science.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Airplane fuel miscalculation
In a well-known incident, a passenger aircraft ran out of fuel mid-flight due to a mix-up in units. 
The flight needed 22,300 kg fuel in total, but the ground crew miscalculated the fuel required, 
since they used the density of fuel in pounds (lb) per litre rather than kilograms (kg) per litre. 
The aircraft was about 15,000 litres short of fuel and luckily could glide to an emergency landing, 
which damaged the aircraft though there were no casualties. Pounds and kilograms are very 
different. Using standard (SI) units everywhere avoids conversions and errors. 
Why is a kilogram used everywhere? 
When we buy rice or vegetables we expect a kilogram 
to mean the same amount everywhere (Fig. 1.1). Imagine 
the confusion if we used different weights everywhere! 
Thankfully, measurements are based on agreed 
international standards, not local objects or opinions. 
Standard units allow scientific results to be compared, 
and ensure fairness in daily life and trade.
Threads of Curiosity
Fig. 1.1: A vegetable seller using a pan balance
As observations are repeated, measurements refined, and ideas tested 
through experiments, we can organise our understanding of the world 
in a systematic way. In the secondary stage, you will come across terms, 
such as laws, theories, and principles — terms that have specific meaning 
in science. A law usually describes a regular pattern observed in nature, 
often expressed using words or mathematical relationships. For example, 
Newton’s laws of motion explain the jerk felt when a bus stops suddenly. 
Threads of 
Curiosity
Why is the speed of light 
denoted by ‘c’? 
Scientific symbols often 
come from history, and 
are based on international 
agreements, not necessarily 
abbreviations of 
convenience. For example, 
the speed of light, is usually 
denoted with the symbol c, 
since it comes from the Latin 
word celeritas, meaning 
speed. Today, the speed of 
light is one of the physical 
constants, defined to be 
exactly 299792458 m/s.
Chapter-01.indd 3 28-04-2026 14:35:58
