4 Exploration|Grade 9
A theory goes a step further and provides an explanation of why those 
patterns occur, usually based on evidence gathered over time and available 
at that time. For example, the atomic theory explains how molecules are 
formed. Principles are broad ideas that help us make sense in a given 
situation. For example, the principle of conservation of energy being 
applied when climbing up the stairs. 
Do remember that in science, a theory does not mean a guess or an 
untested idea, it is an explanation based on careful testing and critical 
examination. These ideas are always open to improvement and often 
change as new evidence becomes available. This is a key feature of science 
that makes it reliable.
One of the most remarkable strengths of science is its ability to make 
predictions. When laws, theories, and models are well established, they 
allow us to anticipate what will happen under new or different conditions, 
before we can perform an experiment, and in many cases even if we cannot 
perform an experiment. Using ideas about motion, we can predict how far 
a kicked football will travel; using knowledge of chemical reactions, we can 
estimate how much carbon dioxide will be produced, or how soft a baked 
bread would be; using biological principles, we can predict how one’s 
breathing would change while running. Remember that these predictions 
are not guesses, they are reasoned expectations based on evidence and 
careful thinking. When predictions match observations, confidence in the 
underlying science grows. But even more important, when they do not, 
scientists re-examine their assumptions, models, or measurements. In this 
way, prediction is a powerful tool that drives further exploration and a 
deeper understanding of the world.
Example 1.2: How do we check predictions? Varsha told her friend 
Meghna, “It will rain this afternoon because the clouds look dark”. Think 
of some questions Meghna could ask Varsha to make this prediction 
scientifically testable.
Answer: Good scientific questions will look for measurable evidence and 
past patterns. Questions with simple yes/no answers are usually not so 
useful. Meghna could ask Varsha questions like (these are just examples) 
“What was the condition of sky when it rained the last time? What is the 
humidity today? Was it above 80 per cent the last time it rained? What is 
today’s wind speed and direction? Is the temperature dropping like it did 
before the recent rains?”. Questions like these ask about measurable data 
and past patterns, which go beyond mere ‘clouds look dark’.
Why do weather forecasts sometimes go wrong? 
Weather depends on many changing factors, such as temperature, pressure, humidity, and 
wind. Weather forecasts use measurements and models, but very tiny differences in conditions 
can grow over time and lead to something completely different. This is why forecasts are 
usually reliable for a few hours or even a few days, but less certain further into the future.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Even the most successful scientific theories have limits and may fail 
when new conditions are explored or when measurements become more 
1. Think of a 
prediction you 
or your family 
made recently 
(for example, 
the outcome 
of a cricket 
match). Was 
it based on 
evidence and 
reasoning, 
or mainly on 
guesswork? 
How can 
scientific 
thinking 
improve such 
predictions?
Pause and 
Ponder
Chapter-01.indd 4 28-04-2026 14:35:58
