6 Exploration|Grade 9
Example 1.3: Estimate how many litres of air you breathe in one day. Start 
by estimating how many breaths you take per minute, and the volume 
of one breath. Your aim is not to find an exact answer, but a reasonable 
estimate. 
Answer: At rest, we take about 12 – 15 breaths a minute, and there are 
60 × 24 = 1440 minutes in a day, so we take roughly 18 – 22 thousand 
breaths, about 20 thousand breaths a day. We also need to find the volume 
of air in one breath. One way to estimate this is to think that it takes about 
4 – 5 breaths to fill a typical rubber party balloon, which when inflated has 
a volume of about 2 litres. So, one breath is perhaps about 0.5 litre. Hence, 
we breathe in about 10,000 litres of air a day! 
Now, it is hard to see if this estimate is reasonable or not. But if 
we go back to our balloon example, one could blow up a balloon in 
about 20 s, so maybe we could fill 3 balloons a minute. Multiplying 
minute
3balloon
×
balloon
2litres
×
day
1440 minutes
 will give about 8640 litres, which 
for estimation purposes is reasonably close to our earlier estimate of 
10,000 litres. Naturally, we would get extremely tired very quickly after 
blowing balloons nonstop, unlike normal restful breathing.
Pause and Ponder
2. Describe one situation where an approximate answer is good enough, 
and one where you would need a very exact value.
After Grade 10, if you decide to study science, it will be divided into 
branches like physics, chemistry, biology and earth science, and even in 
Grades 9 and 10, the chapters you have will focus on some of these areas. 
We’ve highlighted some of the exciting things you may learn about in the 
Next Level Up boxes. However, do remember that the natural world does 
not have any such boundaries. These divisions are made by us to only 
help organise knowledge, they are not independent of each other. Most 
of the real-world problems today, such as understanding climate change, 
developing medicines, or designing sustainable technologies require ideas 
from several disciplines together. Science also connects naturally with 
mathematics, technology, arts, and social sciences. To make sense of the 
world fully, we need to connect multiple ways of knowing and expressing 
ideas, each enriching the other.
Pause and Ponder
3. Choose a real‑life object (maybe a pressure cooker or a mobile phone) or 
a problem (maybe a traffic jam near your school). Make a sketch listing 
what kind of ideas from physics, chemistry, biology, earth science, or 
mathematics are involved. Show how at least two branches of science 
connect with your example.
Chapter-01.indd 6 03-Apr-26 7:46:48 PM
