2 Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
Brahmagupta’s work was translated into Arabic (as the Sindhind), 
and the Ujjayinī meridian entered Arabic geography under the name 
‘Arin,’ serving as the zero-longitude reference for early Arabic maps 
which also then made use of negative numbers. The influential Arab 
scholar Al-Bīrūnī (c. 1000 CE) travelled to India, studied the Siddhāntas, 
and used Indian trigonometric methods to calculate the coordinates of 
various cities across Asia. Al-Bīrūnī also later perfected the ‘astrolabe’, 
a handheld device that allowed sailors to find their coordinates by 
looking at the stars. Ömar Khayyām (c. 1100 CE), who had become an 
expert in the Indian decimal system and algebraic formalism, was the 
first mathematician to solve algebraic problems using geometry by 
interpreting them in terms of coordinates in the plane. 
These concepts eventually reached Europe in the 12th century. The 
final leap occurred when following the related work of Fermat (1636 
CE), René Descartes (1637 CE) formalised the fact that any point in a 
two-dimensional plane could be defined by simply two numbers—
representing the point’s distances from two perpendicular axes. Points 
and more complex geometric shapes could then be described precisely 
using algebra and equations, thus bringing the areas of geometry and 
algebra even closer together.
In Grades 9 and 10, you will have a chance to study this amazing 
coordinate system which has such a rich history in human thought and 
endeavour. You will be able to locate objects with pinpoint accuracy. 
You will also see how using coordinates enables us to visualise algebraic 
equations as geometric shapes, and vice versa. 
We begin our study of coordinates with a story that will help you 
understand these new terms better.
1.2 Settling In
It is the beginning of the academic year and Reiaan is both excited and 
nervous. The family has just moved to a new city. He and his sister, 
Shalini, will be attending a new school. Today, Shalini will help him 
settle into the new environment. When someone is not able to see, this 
can be a very big challenge, but with their mother’s transferable job, the 
siblings have done it often, and it has become easier with each move. 
Shalini has just completed Grade 9 and this time, she decided to put 
to use what she has learnt in Coordinate Geometry in Mathematics to 
guide Reiaan.
Shalini wanted Reiaan to feel the directions, so she used a 
rectangular grid on which she had fixed pins and threads. This showed 
Chapter 1.indd 2 4/15/2026 2:52:19 PM
