Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 185
Activity 10.1: Let us explore
1. Take a cardboard box with one side open 
and a rubber band.
2. Stretch the rubber band across the open 
side of the box (Fig. 10.2). 
3. Holding the box steady with one hand, 
pluck the rubber band with a finger. Do 
you hear any sound?
4. Pluck the rubber band again and watch it 
carefully. Is it vibrating? 
5. Wait till the rubber band stops vibrating. 
Do you still hear the sound?
6. Change the tension in the rubber band by 
stretching it more or loosening it slightly and plucking it each time. 
Does the sound change? What changes do you notice?
7. Remove the rubber band from the box. Stretch it between two fingers 
and pluck it near your ear. Is the sound still produced? Is it as loud as 
before?
You may have noticed that as long as the rubber band is stretched and 
vibrating, sound is produced. Once the vibration stops, so does the sound. 
From this activity, we conclude that sound is produced by vibrations. 
Vibration refers to the periodic to and fro motion (oscillations) of an object. 
Pulling a stretched string or striking a metal object makes them vibrate, 
which produces sound. Likewise, when you blow through a bansuri (flute), 
vibration of the air inside the hollow pipe produces sound. You have 
learnt earlier that some of these methods are used in a variety of musical 
instruments. Sound can be produced by vibrating strings membranes, air 
columns, and many other vibrating objects. In most musical instruments, 
more than one vibrating part is involved in producing sound. The object 
that produces sound is called the ‘source’ of the sound.
How do humans and animals create sound? 
While talking or singing, gently touch your 
throat. Do you feel vibrations anywhere? In 
humans and some other animals, sound is 
produced by the vibration of vocal cords, 
which are tightly stretched muscular flaps 
located inside the voice box or larynx, 
in the throat (Fig. 10.3). The tongue, lips, 
mouth and nasal cavity in humans help in 
converting sound into speech or music. 
Some animals produce sound by 
striking or rubbing certain body parts. For 
example, grasshoppers and crickets rub 
their wings or legs to produce sound.
Threads of Curiosity
Fig. 10.3: Vocal cords in humans
Vocal 
cords 
Larynx
Vocal cords 
open
Vocal cords 
closed
Fig. 10.2: Vibrating rubber 
band produces sound
Grade 4
Bansuri
Chapter 13
Chapter-10.indd 185 03-Apr-26 8:04:44 PM
