186 Exploration|Grade 9
10.1.1 Tuning fork
An instrument that is often used for experiments with sound is a tuning 
fork. A tuning fork is a U-shaped metal bar with a stem. It is usually 
made of steel or aluminium. The sides of the ‘U’ are called prongs or tines 
(Fig. 10.4a) which are struck on a pad to make them vibrate.
Activity 10.2: Let us explore
1. Take a tuning fork and a soft rubber pad.
2. Hold the tuning fork by its stem. 
3. Strike one of the prongs of the tuning fork gently against the rubber 
pad (Fig. 10.4b) and bring it close to your ear. Do you hear a sound? 
(Take care not to strike the tuning fork against a hard surface). 
4. Now, gently touch a water surface with one of the vibrating prongs of 
the tuning fork. Do you see waves forming on the surface of water?
5. Repeat step 3 a few times while bringing the prongs of the tuning fork 
near your ear in different orientations. Do you hear the sound?
When you bring a vibrating tuning fork near your ear you hear the 
sound that is produced. When the prong touches the surface of water, 
waves form on the surface of water, indicating that the prongs of the tuning 
fork are indeed vibrating (Fig. 10.4c). These observations support the idea 
that sound is produced by vibrating objects.
1. Explore various ways of producing sound.
2. Make a list of different types of musical instruments and identify their 
vibrating parts which produce sound.
Pause and Ponder
What if your name were a tune instead of a word? In Kongthong, a 
village near Shillong in Meghalaya also known as the Whistling Village 
every person has a ‘tune name’ that can be sung or whistled. This unique 
tradition, called Jingrwai Iawbei, begins at birth when a mother composes 
a lullaby-like tune for her child.
Threads of Curiosity
10.2 Propagation of Sound
You have seen that sound is produced by vibrating objects. How does sound 
reach your ear from the source? Sound travels through air but does it also 
travel through solids and liquids?
Activity 10.3: Let us investigate
1. You and your friend stand on opposite sides of a desk in the classroom. 
Let your friend gently knock or scratch on the desk. Listen carefully to 
the sound produced with your ear in the air.
Fig. 10.4: (c) A prong 
of vibrating tuning 
fork touching the 
surface of water
Fig. 10.4: (b) Striking a 
tuning fork against a 
rubber pad
Fig. 10.4: (a) A tuning 
fork and a rubber pad
Prongs
Rubber pad
Stem
Chapter-10.indd 186 03-Apr-26 8:04:58 PM
