Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 187
2. Now, place your ear against the desk, close 
your other ear and listen again, as shown 
in Fig. 10.5. Are you able to hear the sound 
through the table?
This shows that sound can also travel through 
solids.
Activity 10.4: Let us investigate
1. Take a large tub or bucket of water filled to the 
brim and two metal spoons.
2. Tap the spoons against one another and listen to the sound 
produced (Fig. 10.6a).
3. Now, submerge the two metal spoons in water without touching 
the sides or bottom of the bucket and tap them against one another 
again (Fig. 10.6b). Do you again hear the sound produced?
The sound of the submerged spoons tells you that the sound has 
reached you after travelling through water and air. If sound did not 
travel through liquids, would you have heard this sound?
Sound can travel or propagate through solids, liquids and gases. The 
material through which sound propagates is called a medium. Sound 
propagates from its source to you through a medium. But suppose 
that there is no medium in the space between you and the source of 
the sound. A space where there is no medium (matter) is referred to as 
vacuum. Would you hear sound in vacuum?
10.2.1 Sound needs a medium to propagate
A common experiment to show that sound needs a medium to 
propagate is the vacuum bell jar experiment shown in Fig. 10.7. An 
electric bell kept in a bell jar is switched on and the loudness of the 
sound is noted. As air is sucked out from the bell jar using a vacuum 
pump, the sound becomes fainter. Once a near 
vacuum is reached, almost no sound can be heard 
even though the bell can be seen ringing. When air 
is let back into the jar, the sound can be heard again 
and it gradually becomes as loud as before.
This experiment shows that sound cannot 
propagate in vacuum. Sound needs a medium to 
propagate. The medium can be a solid, a liquid, or 
a gas.
In outer space, there is a near vacuum, and 
thus, sound cannot propagate. Hence, astronauts in 
spacesuits doing spacewalks cannot directly hear each 
other speak or hear sounds like two metal objects 
clanking together. Instead, they communicate through 
special devices fitted into their spacesuits.
Fig. 10.5: Investigating if sound travels 
through solid objects
Fig. 10.6: Tapping two 
spoons against each other 
in (a) air, and (b) water
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10.7: Illustration of a vacuum 
bell jar
Electric 
bell 
To power 
supply
To vacuum 
pump
Bell jar
Chapter-10.indd 187 03-Apr-26 8:05:01 PM
