188 Exploration|Grade 9
3. Assertion (A): We cannot hear the sound of a bell ringing in a closed jar 
after most of the air is pumped out.
Reason (R): Sound requires a medium to travel.
Choose the correct statement:
(i) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(ii) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
(iii) A is true, but R is false.
(iv) A is false, but R is true.
Pause and Ponder
10.3 Sound Waves
Sound needs a material medium to propagate but how does it propagate 
through that medium? In Activity 10.2, you could hear a sound when you 
held the vibrating tuning fork near your ear in different orientations. This 
indicates that sound propagates in multiple directions from a source (in 
this case from the tuning fork). In general, the directions in which sound 
propagates may depend on the shape of the source. However, for simplicity, 
we will consider and illustrate sound as moving in only one direction.
Let us begin with a simple activity using a slinky (a long, flexible metal 
or plastic spring toy) as an analogy for the medium through which sound 
travels. To simulate the production of sound, we will vibrate one end of 
the slinky.
Activity 10.5: Let us observe
1. Take a slinky and a marker.
2. Make a mark on a turn of the slinky with the marker. Lay out the slinky 
horizontally on a table or floor. 
3. Ask a friend to hold one end of the slinky fixed while you hold the 
other end keeping the slinky slightly stretched. 
4. Give the slinky at your end a sharp push towards your friend and then 
quickly pull it back again (Fig. 10.8). Do you observe a disturbance 
created in the slinky which moves towards your friend?
5. Now, push and pull the slinky end multiple times in quick succession 
(The pulling and pushing of the end of the slinky is similar to the sound 
being produced continuously). Are a series of disturbances produced 
in the slinky? Do these disturbances move across the length of slinky? 
Does the mark on the slinky move back and forth parallel to the 
direction of the disturbance?
Fig. 10.8: Disturbance travelling along a slinky
Turns are closer 
together
Turns are more 
spread out
Chapter-10.indd 188 03-Apr-26 8:05:02 PM
