Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 189
Fig. 10.9: Density of air in a tube with a piston
(a) Piston not oscillating (average air density in the 
entire tube)
(b) Forward motion of piston produces a compression 
(region of air with a higher density)
C
(c) Backward motion of piston produces a rarefaction 
(region of air with a lower density)
R C
(d) Oscillating piston produces alternate compressions 
and rarefactions
C R C R
You observe regions in the slinky where its turns are closer together 
than usual, and other regions where they are more spread out. These 
closely spaced and spread out regions appear to travel along the slinky. 
However, the mark does not travel along the slinky, it only oscillates about 
its position of rest parallel to the direction of the disturbance. Each turn 
oscillates about its own position while the disturbance travels from one 
end of the slinky to the other.
Sound moves in a similar way through a medium. In our analogy, the 
closeness or spreading out of the turns of the slinky represents the higher 
or lower density of air through which sound is travelling. Let us consider 
a long tube filled with air that has a piston at one end and is open at the 
other. The piston can be made to oscillate back and forth inside the tube. 
Here, the oscillating piston is used as a simple 
and idealistic model of the source of sound to 
help understand how sound travels through air.
When the piston is not oscillating, the air 
inside the tube has a certain uniform density, 
which we call the average density (Fig. 10.9a), 
where the dots represent the air particles. As the 
piston moves forward, it pushes and displaces 
the nearby air particles in a forward direction, 
thereby compressing the air and increasing 
its density in a small region close to the piston 
(Fig. 10.9b). This region of air with higher 
density (compared to the average density) is 
called a compression (C).
The compressed air particles collide with the 
particles further ahead passing the compression 
forward. The compressed particles further 
collide with their neighbouring particles, and so 
on. As a result, the higher density compression 
moves forward through the air even though the 
air particles themselves do not travel with it.
As the piston moves backwards, the air particles move backwards in 
the direction of the piston and the air in a small region close to the piston 
becomes less dense (Fig. 10.9c). This region of air with lower density 
(compared to the average density) is called a rarefaction (R). Again, due 
to collisions with nearby particles, the rarefaction moves ahead while the 
particles themselves oscillate only about their mean positions. 
As the piston oscillates in forward and backward directions, 
compressions and rarefactions are produced alternately (Fig. 10.9d). These 
travel away from the source, and a series of compression and rarefaction 
are produced. 
The disturbance consisting of a series of alternating compressions and 
rarefactions propagating through a medium, without the actual flow of the 
particles of medium, is called a sound wave. The direction in which the 
wave travels is known as the direction of propagation of the wave.
Note
The particles 
of the medium 
do not travel 
with the wave. 
They just 
vibrate about 
their mean 
positions.
Chapter-10.indd 189 03-Apr-26 8:05:03 PM
