190 Exploration|Grade 9
When the medium is not confined to a 
tube, its vibrating particles collide with the 
surrounding particles in all directions, and 
thus, the sound wave spreads out in all 
directions. A small sound source continuously 
producing sound in all directions causes 
compressions and rarefactions that spread 
through the surrounding medium in all 
directions as spherical waves (Fig. 10.10). 
When they reach the listener, they are 
perceived as sound.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Fig. 10.10: Sound from a 
point source propagates in all 
directions as spherical waves
Point 
Source
Threads of Curiosity
What causes sudden loud sounds, such as 
when firecrackers explode or during a clap 
of thunder? These sounds are produced in a 
slightly different way. When air or gases are 
heated rapidly, they expand very rapidly in 
a short time. This rapid expansion creates a 
sudden disturbance in the air density that 
travels outward. When this disturbance reaches 
our ears, we perceive it as a loud sound pulse.
A similar but more complex disturbance is produced when a supersonic 
aircraft (Fig. 10.11) flies at a speed higher than the speed of sound, creating 
a loud sound known as a sonic boom.
Fig. 10.11: A supersonic 
aircraft
Did you notice (Fig. 10.9) that the displacement of the medium is parallel 
to the direction of wave propagation? In sound waves, the particles of the 
medium vibrate back and forth parallel to the direction of propagation 
of disturbance (Fig. 10.12). Such waves where the particles vibrate in a 
direction parallel to the direction of the wave propagation are known as 
longitudinal waves.
Direction of particle vibration
Direction of wave 
propagation
Fig. 10.12: A longitudinal wave
If there is no medium (i.e., no particles), is the propagation of sound 
waves possible? Without a material medium, sound waves cannot 
propagate. Waves that require a material medium for propagation are 
called mechanical waves. Sound wave is a type of a mechanical wave.
Chapter-10.indd 190 03-Apr-26 8:05:06 PM
