Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 191
Mechanical waves are of two types: 
longitudinal waves and transverse waves. 
Sound wave is an example of a longitudinal 
wave where the particles vibrate parallel to 
the direction of the wave propagation. In a 
transverse wave, the particles vibrate in a 
direction perpendicular to the direction of 
wave propagation (Fig. 10.13).
Earthquakes produce seismic waves that travel through the Earth. These waves 
could be longitudinal or transverse. The longitudinal seismic waves are the first to be 
detected by seismographs that detect the earthquakes.
Not all waves are mechanical waves, i.e., not all waves need a medium to 
propagate. Light, which is a transverse wave, can travel through vacuum. This is 
why light from the Sun and other stars can reach the Earth. You will study waves 
in more detail in higher grades.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Next
Level
Up
Fig. 10.13: Transverse Wave
Direction of particle 
vibration Direction of wave 
propagation
4. Assertion (A): Compressions and rarefactions move through the medium.
Reason (R): Individual particles of the medium continuously move forward with 
the wave.
Choose the correct statement:
(i) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(ii) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
(iii) A is true, but R is false.
(iv) A is false, but R is true.
Pause and Ponder
10.4 Energy of Sound Waves
Activity 10.6: Let us experiment
1. Take a wide mouthed container, a cellophane or 
rubber sheet (such as that of a balloon) of size 
larger than its opening, a loud sound source 
(such as a metal plate and a beater) and some 
grains or particles (such as rice, semolina, salt, 
or chalk powder). 
2. Stretch the sheet over the edges of the container 
tightly and fix it with tape or a rubber band 
(Fig. 10.14). 
3. Sprinkle the grains evenly over the sheet, 
ensuring they are not clumped together. 
4. Produce a loud sound near the bowl without 
touching it. Observe the grains on the sheet. 
Does the sound have any effect on the grains?
Fig. 10.14: Sound moving grains 
(coloured)
Chapter-10.indd 191 03-Apr-26 8:05:08 PM
