192 Exploration|Grade 9
5. Repeat step 4 with different sources of sounds and observe the effect 
on the grains. You can try increasing or reducing the volume of sound. 
Try with different grains.
Do you observe the grains over the sheet move or jump? Why does this 
happen, even though the source of sound is not touching the sheet or the 
container? As sound propagates through air, it reaches the sheet and makes 
it vibrate. This vibration causes the grains to move. 
This shows that sound is a form of energy. When the source of sound 
vibrates, it transfers energy to the surrounding medium. As sound waves 
propagate in a medium, the vibration of particles of the medium and their 
collisions with other particles result in the transfer of energy.
Microphones (Fig. 10.15a) that help 
us capture sound from various 
sources convert sound energy to 
electrical energy. When we speak or 
sing into a microphone, the sound 
waves make a thin membrane, 
called a diaphragm, vibrate. These 
vibrations are converted into 
an electrical signal. A speaker 
(Fig. 10.15b) does the opposite; an electrical signal makes a 
cone or diaphragm attached inside the speaker vibrate, which 
produces sound. If all components work properly, the sound 
from the speaker closely matches the originally captured sound. 
Bridging Science and Society
Fig. 10. 15: (a) A microphone, 
(b) a speaker
(a) (b)
Pause and Ponder
5. When sound travels from a tuning fork to your ear, which of the 
following actually reaches your ear?
(i) Air particles near the tuning fork
(ii) Energy carried by sound waves
(iii) The tuning fork material
(iv) A continuous stream of compressed air
10.5 Graphical Representation of a Sound Wave
As a sound wave propagates, at any given instant of time the density of 
the medium varies periodically with distance from the source. Fig. 10.16a 
shows the periodic variation of density with distance at any given instant 
of time. The graph corresponding to it is shown in Fig. 10.16b where the 
distance is plotted on the x-axis, while the density of the medium is plotted 
on the y-axis. The average density is marked as a horizontal dashed line. 
The density varies (above and below the average density) with distance at 
a given instant of time.
Note
In the 
propagation 
of a sound 
wave, it is the 
energy that is 
transferred, not 
the particles of 
the medium.
Particles in a medium 
are never truly at 
rest. They are always 
randomly vibrating 
due to thermal energy. 
When a sound wave 
passes through the 
medium, it temporarily 
increases the vibration 
of these particles. After 
the wave passes, the 
particles return to their 
usual random motion.
Ready to Go 
Beyond 
Chapter-10.indd 192 03-Apr-26 8:05:09 PM
