194 Exploration|Grade 9
10.6 Characteristics of a Sound Wave
10.6.1 Wavelength, frequency and time period
Let us learn about some quantities which are used to describe a 
sound wave. The distance between the two consecutive crests or 
two consecutive troughs is called the wavelength of a wave. This 
is shown in Fig. 10.18 where two sound waves are shown with long 
and short wavelengths. The wavelength is usually represented by 
λ (Greek letter lambda). Its SI unit is the metre (m). 
Another characteristic of sound wave is how often the density 
variations occur at a given position in the medium when a sound 
wave passes through that position. The density of the medium at 
the given position changes alternately between a maximum density 
(crest) and a minimum density (trough). The change in the density of 
the medium at a fixed point, from maximum to minimum and then 
again to maximum (or vice versa), makes one complete oscillation.
The number of density oscillations at a fixed point per unit time 
is the frequency of the sound wave. It is usually represented by 
ν (Greek letter nu). Its SI unit is per second ( or s–1) also called a 
hertz (symbol Hz). 
The time taken for one complete density oscillation at a fixed 
point is defined as the time period of the wave. The time period of 
the wave is represented by the symbol T. Its SI unit is second (s). 
The time period and frequency are inversely related; a shorter 
time period corresponds to a higher frequency.
T
ν = 1 (10.1)
Usually, everyday sounds contain a mixture of many frequencies. 
Nearly single frequency sounds can be made by striking a tuning 
fork (Section 10.1.1) or by oral whistling.
Activity 10.7: Let us experiment (demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a classroom group 
activity facilitated by the teacher.
1. Use a mobile app, such as Phyphox that can identify frequencies 
of sounds. Use the ‘Audio Spectrum’ option that displays the 
frequency graphically or in hertz (Hz). 
2. Try to sing the musical notes ‘Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni, Sa’ one 
after another, or use a music or tone generating app on another 
phone to produce those notes. Observe how the frequency 
changes as each note is produced. 
3. Record the approximate frequency values for each musical 
note.
4. Compare the musical notes by taking the ratio of each frequency 
with respect to the ‘Sa’. Do you observe any pattern?
5. If both voice and mobile-generated notes are used, compare 
their frequencies for the same musical notes. 
Fig. 10.18: Sound waves 
(b) Short wavelength
Density
C R C R C R C R C R C R
Distance
(a) Long wavelength
Density
Distance
C R C R
Threads of 
Curiosity
There are some free 
apps which can be 
used by the teacher 
to produce as well as 
identify the sounds of 
different frequencies. 
Phyphox is one such 
app. In fact, using 
the ‘Audio Scope’ in 
the Phyphox app and 
whistling carefully 
will often produce a 
graph like Fig. 10.18 
indicating that it 
is almost a single 
frequency sound.
λ
λ
λ
λ
Chapter-10.indd 194 03-Apr-26 8:05:10 PM
