Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 195
Density
Distance
Amplitude
Density
Distance
Amplitude
C R C R C R C R C R C R
Fig. 10.20: Sound waves
(a) Low amplitude (b) High amplitude
In this activity, you would have noticed that the frequency is lowest for 
the ‘Sa’ and gradually increases for the other notes. Each musical note has 
a distinct frequency, which makes it sound different. You can use the app 
to compare the frequencies of other sounds, including the voices of your 
friends too.
Example 10.1: If there are 10 density oscillations in 2 seconds at a given 
position, then calculate the (i) frequency of sound wave, and (ii) its time 
period.
Answer: number of oscillations 10 Frequency of sound wave = = = 5 Hz time taken 2 s
Time taken for a single density oscillation at a position = 2 s = 0.2 s
10
7. Conduct Activity 10.1 once again with a thick rubber
band and then with a thin rubber band. Does the 
thin rubber band vibrate faster than the thick 
rubber band? If yes, how do the frequency and time 
period of the sound produced by the thin rubber 
band differ from that of the thick rubber band? 
8. If the frequency of a sound wave produced by an 
oscillating piston of a long tube filled with air is 
20 Hz, then how many oscillations does the piston 
complete per minute?
9. For the sound wave represented by the graph shown 
in Fig. 10.19, what is half of its wavelength?
Pause and Ponder
Density
Distance (cm)
0 1.5 3.0 4.5
Fig. 10.19: Graphical representation 
of a sound wave
10.6.2 Amplitude and intensity of the sound waves
Sound propagates as density 
oscillations of the medium via 
compressions and rarefactions. 
The amplitude of a sound wave 
is the maximum change in the 
density of air in a compression 
(or a rarefaction) compared to 
the average density. A larger 
change in density corresponds 
to a larger amplitude (Fig. 10.20). 
The amplitude and the 
amount of energy a wave carries 
are related. A wave with a larger amplitude carries more energy than the one 
with a smaller amplitude. This can be seen in Activity 10.6. When the plate 
is struck harder, more energy is transferred to the particles of surrounding 
medium, causing larger displacements from their mean positions. As a result, 
the sheet vibrates to a larger displacement and the grains jump higher.
The amount of sound energy passing through a unit area perpendicular 
to the direction of the propagation of sound wave in a unit time is called the 
intensity of sound.
Chapter-10.indd 195 03-Apr-26 8:05:11 PM
