196 Exploration|Grade 9
As sound wave travels away from its source, 
it spreads over a larger area (Fig. 10.21). Since the 
energy must be conserved, the same amount of 
energy is now spread over a larger area. Hence, 
the intensity decreases with distance from the 
source. Sounds produced with initial larger 
amplitude carry more energy and can travel a 
larger distance before intensity reduces to zero.
10.6.3 Speed of Sound
The speed of sound describes how fast sound waves propagate through a 
medium. In terms of compressions and rarefactions, one can think of speed 
as how fast these density disturbances propagate through the medium. The 
speed of sound can be defined as the distance which a point on a wave, 
such as a crest (or a trough), travels in unit time. 
For a sound wave of given frequency, the distance between two 
consecutive crests (or two consecutive troughs) is one wavelength ( λ ). This 
distance is covered by the disturbance in one time period (T ). Therefore, 
the speed of sound (v) is
distance speed = time ⇒ v
T
λ =
We know that frequency T
ν = 1 (Eq. 10.1). Thus, 
 v = λ ν × (10.2)
speed = wavelength × frequency
The speed of sound depends on the medium through which it 
travels. It travels fastest in solids, slower in liquids, and slowest in gases. 
For example, sound travels about 4 – 5 times faster in water and typically 
15 – 20 times faster in solids than in the air. 
The speed of sound in air also depends on the temperature and humidity. 
As we increase the temperature or humidity, the speed of sound increases. 
For example, the speed of sound in dry air is about 331 m s–1 at 0 ºC and 
nearly 344 m s–1 at 22 ºC. 
In most media, such as air the speed of sound depends only on the medium 
and not the source or the frequency. If the frequency of the source changes, 
the wavelength of the sound wave in the medium changes, while the 
speed remains constant. Some special materials, such as porous foams or 
engineered structures can behave differently.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Example 10.2: Human hearing roughly spans 20 Hz to 20 kHz. What are 
the corresponding wavelengths in air for these two frequencies? Use the 
speed of sound in air as 344 m s–1.
Answer: Using the relation between wavelength ( λ ), frequency (ν ), and 
speed (v),
speed of the wave = frequency × wavelength
What if …
the speed of 
sound in air 
depended on 
its frequency? 
Would music still 
sound pleasant 
when a singer 
performs with 
instruments? 
Why or why not?
Point source
Fig. 10.21: Sound energy spreading 
over a larger area with distance
Chapter-10.indd 196 03-Apr-26 8:05:12 PM
