198 Exploration|Grade 9
11. Two friends are standing along a steel 
fence at a distance of 340 m from each 
other (Fig. 10.23). Gunjan places her ear 
over the fence and her friend knocks 
the fence with a metal object. Using the 
values of the speed of sound in steel 
and air given in Table 10.1, calculate 
the time difference between the sound 
that reached Gunjan through the air 
and the steel. Would it have been possible for her to distinguish between the two 
sounds? (The time interval between two sounds must be at least 0.1 s to be heard 
separately.)
Fig. 10.23: Time difference between the 
sound reaching through air and steel
10.6.4 Human perception of sound
The physical properties of sound, such as time period, wavelength, 
frequency, amplitude and speed are well-defined and can be measured. 
However, how we experience sound is subjective. Human perception of 
sound is described by terms, such as loudness and pitch which do not have 
simple relations with the physical properties.
Pitch
How frequency is perceived by humans is called pitch. Sounds perceived 
to be shrill, such as a whistle or a siren are said to have high pitch, while 
deep sounds like thunder or an aircraft rumble have low pitch. In general, 
high pitch sounds have higher frequency and low pitch sounds have lower 
frequency, although the exact mathematical relation is complicated. 
Threads of Curiosity
Everyone’s voice sounds unique and you can often instantly recognise your teacher 
or friends calling out your name. Why do our voices sound different? Male, female, 
and children’s voices differ not just in their frequency but also on how the sound is 
shaped by the throat, mouth, and nasal cavities. During adolescence, boys’ vocal cords 
of boys lengthen and thicken, vibrating less frequently thus, ‘deepening’ their voice.
Let us carry out an activity to listen and appreciate sounds at different 
frequencies.
Activity 10.8: Let us experiment (demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a classroom group activity 
facilitated by teacher.
1. Open a mobile app that can generate sounds.
2. Set the frequency to 100 Hz, tap ‘play’, and listen carefully.
3. Increase the frequency in steps of 100 Hz up to 1000 Hz and describe 
how the sound changes. 
4. Next, set the frequency to 50 Hz. Reduce the frequency till about 20 Hz 
or the point where you cannot hear the sound anymore.
Chapter-10.indd 198 03-Apr-26 8:05:14 PM
