Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 199
Can humans hear all sounds? Humans can only hear a limited range of 
sound frequencies. The audible range or the human hearing range is from 
20 Hz to 20,000 Hz (20 kHz). However, this range varies from person to 
person and decreases with age. Sound waves with frequency below 20 Hz 
are called infrasonic waves, while sound waves with frequency above 
20 kHz are called ultrasonic waves. Humans cannot hear infrasound or 
ultrasound but some animals can. Dogs, cats, bats, dolphins can detect 
ultrasound, while elephants can detect infrasound.
Loudness
Humans perceive the amplitude of a sound wave as loudness. Sounds with 
larger amplitude are heard louder, while those with smaller amplitude 
sound softer. The loudness decreases as we move farther away from the 
source.
In everyday language, loudness and intensity are often used 
interchangeably. However, intensity is a measurable quantity, whereas 
loudness depends on the listener’s hearing ability.
Sound loudness is commonly measured in decibels (dB). Very soft sounds like rustling 
leaves are around a few dB, normal conversation is about 60 dB, while very loud 
sounds, such as firecrackers can exceed 100 dB. Even a small increase in the dB level 
means a large increase in the sound intensity.
Unwanted or harmful sound is called noise. Noise pollution is a severe problem.
Exposure to sound levels above recommended limits, especially for long durations 
can affect health, sleep, and hearing. Prolonged exposure to loud sound can lead to 
hearing loss, which can be tested using audiograms. People with hearing loss may 
use hearing aids, which consist of a microphone, amplifier, and speaker to help the 
wearer hear and communicate better.
Bridging Science and Society
Ready to Go Beyond 
We often do not realise how amazing our sense of 
hearing is. When sound enters the ear, it causes a thin 
membrane called the eardrum to vibrate (Fig. 10.24). 
Tiny bones quickly amplify these vibrations and the 
cochlea converts them into electrical signals that rush 
to the brain, which perceives them as sound.
Having two ears allows the brain to pinpoint the 
direction of the origin of sound. By comparing which 
ear hears the sound first, it figures out where the 
sound came from based on the tiny time gap between 
the two (often less than a thousandth of a second).
Animals hear in different ways. Snakes and fish 
sense vibrations through their bodies, while some 
insects have ear-like organs on their body parts.
Fig. 10.24: A schematic 
diagram of human ear
Cochlea
Ear drum
Chapter-10.indd 199 03-Apr-26 8:05:15 PM
