200 Exploration|Grade 9
A tone is a sound of a single frequency like that 
produced by a tuning fork or by oral whistling 
(Fig. 10.25a). A musical note like the sound 
produced by plucking a tanpura string or 
singing (Fig. 10.25b) is a combination of a lowest 
frequency called the fundamental and higher 
frequencies called overtones, which together 
create a rich and pleasant sound. Indian string 
instruments like the sarangi, sitar, and veena
often use extra strings to enrich this combination. 
Even when different instruments like a 
flute, ektara, or tabla play the same note at the 
same loudness each sounds unique. This quality 
is called timbre, and comes from their shape, 
material and construction, which determine the 
pattern and intensity of the overtones. 
An octave is the interval between two notes where one has double the frequency 
of the other (for example, 200 Hz and 400 Hz), measured between their fundamental 
frequencies.
Threads of Curiosity
Fig. 10.25: Schematic representation 
of the sound produced by 
(a) a vibrating tuning fork or a person 
whistling, and (b) a child singing
(a)
(b)
Sir C. V. Raman won India’s first Nobel Prize in Science for 
discovering the Raman Effect in light. He also made important 
contributions to acoustics by studying Indian percussion 
instruments, such as the tabla and mridangam to understand 
how they produce rich and nuanced sounds.
Meet a Scientist
Indian drums like the tabla (Fig. 10.26) or mridangam
have a black patch at the centre of the drum head 
membrane called the syaahi. This patch alters the 
vibration of the membrane, allowing these instruments 
to produce a rich variety of sounds. The syaahi also gives 
a level of tonal control rarely found in other drums.
Threads of Curiosity
Fig. 10.26: A tabla set
10.7 Reflection of Sound 
Sound waves can bounce off obstacles like solids or liquids and this is 
known as the reflection of sound. Sound follow the same laws of reflection 
as those of light which you have learned earlier. The directions in which 
the sound is incident and is thereafter reflected make equal angles with the 
normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence, with all three 
lying in the same plane. One of the most common examples of the reflection 
of sound is an echo.
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 10
Chapter-10.indd 200 03-Apr-26 8:05:21 PM
