Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 201
10.7.1 Echo
If we shout near a mountain, a cliff, or in a long corridor we may hear our 
voice again after some time. This is known as an echo. The sound reflects 
off the hard surface of a distant object and comes back to us.
Echoes aren’t heard everywhere. In a small room, wall reflections 
arrive too quickly for the brain to separate them from the original sound. 
If the time gap between two sounds reaching us is at least 0.1 s, we can 
hear them as separate sounds. If it is less than 0.1 s, then we cannot clearly 
distinguish between them. This time duration of 0.1 s can help us estimate 
the minimum distance of a reflecting surface from which we can hear 
an echo.
If we take the speed of sound as 340 m s–1, the distance travelled by 
sound in 0.1 s is 
distance = speed × time = 340 m s–1 × 0.1 s = 34.0 m
Note that 34 m would be the distance travelled by sound from the source 
to the reflecting surface and back. Hence, the minimum echo distance is 
half of this or 17 m. 
Echoes are stronger from hard and smooth surfaces that reflect sound. 
Soft surfaces like curtains tend to absorb sound, while rough surfaces 
scatter it in different directions, and in such cases it is not possible to hear 
the echoes clearly. 
Example 10.5: You clap in an empty corridor and hear an echo after 
0.5 s. If the speed of sound in air is 340 m s–1, calculate your distance 
from the wall.
Answer: Sound travels to the wall and back, thus,
− × ×
1 340 m s 0.5 s distance from wall = = = 85 m
2 2
v t 
12. An experiment is being set up that requires echoes to arrive at least 0.2 s 
after the emission of sound. What minimum distance should a reflecting 
surface be placed at? Assume the speed of sound to be 343 m s–1.
Pause and Ponder
10.7.2 Reverberation
Sometimes the emitted sound can undergo multiple reflections from 
the walls in a large hall or auditorium. Multiple reflections make sound 
persist after the source stops emitting sound, a phenomenon called 
reverberation. This occurs when sound reflections from surfaces arrive 
with a time difference less than 0.05 s.
Modern auditoriums and large concert halls are architecturally 
designed to have desirable reverberations, which allow the audience 
everywhere to hear speech, music, and other sounds clearly without any 
distortions. Sound absorbing panels, upholstered chairs, curtains and 
other soft, porous surfaces reduce reverberations by unwanted sources 
otherwise it could lead to a garbled sound.
Chapter-10.indd 201 03-Apr-26 8:05:22 PM
