202 Exploration|Grade 9
Threads of Curiosity
Medieval architects across the world, including in India, designed several monuments with deep 
acoustic insights. The renowned Whispering Gallery of the Gol Gumbaz in Bijapur, Karnataka, 
has a remarkable design that allows even a faint whisper to be heard multiple times across the 
large dome.
10.8 Ultrasonic and Infrasonic Waves, and their 
Applications
Sound waves with frequencies outside the human audible range have 
important applications in science, medicine, and technology.
Sound waves
Infrasonic waves
(less than 20 Hz)
Used for detecting natural events, such as 
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions
Used for detecting severe storms as such waves 
travel long distances through air and the Earth
Used for imaging internal organs without 
surgery (known as ultrasonography)
Used for breaking kidney stones into smaller 
pieces, which can then be passed out of the body
Used for ultrasonic welding and for cleaning 
delicate machine parts in industries
Used for detecting defects inside metal blocks 
during construction and industrial testing
Used for locating objects when sound waves get 
reflected off them
Human audible range 
(20 Hz to 20 kHz)
Ultrasonic waves
(more than 20 kHz)
Threads of Curiosity
10.8.1 Echolocation
Bats are nocturnal creatures that fly and 
search for their prey in the dark without 
colliding into objects. Most bats emit short 
bursts of ultrasonic waves which are 
reflected from nearby objects. By sensing 
the echoes the bat can determine the 
position of obstacles and prey (Fig. 10.27).
This ability to locate objects 
using reflected sound waves is called 
echolocation. Besides bats, animals such as 
dolphins, whales, and some birds also use 
echolocation for navigation and hunting. Fig. 10.27: Echolocation by bats
Ultrasonic 
waves sent 
from the bat
Ultrasonic waves 
reflected from the 
prey
humans could 
detect ultrasonic 
waves like dogs 
can? What 
would be the 
advantages and 
disadvantages?
What if …
Chapter-10.indd 202 03-Apr-26 8:05:22 PM
