204 Exploration|Grade 9
1. Which observation best supports the idea that sound is a mechanical 
wave?
(i) Sound shows reflection
(ii) Sound needs a medium to propagate
(iii) Sound has frequency
(iv) Sound carries energy
2. For a sound wave propagating in a medium, increasing its frequency 
will increase its
(i) wavelength
(ii) speed
(iii) number of compressions per second
(iv) time period
Revise, Reflect, Refine
At a Glance
y Sound is produced by vibrating objects.
y Sound is a longitudinal mechanical wave that needs a medium to travel.
y Sound can propagate through solids, liquids and gases.
y In sound propagation, it is the density disturbance that travels and 
not the particles of the medium. The particles of the medium only 
vibrate about their mean positions as the sound wave passes. 
y The distance between the two consecutive crests or two consecutive 
troughs is called the wavelength of a wave.
y The change in density of the medium at a fixed point, from maximum 
to minimum, and then again to the maximum (or vice versa), makes 
one complete oscillation.
y The number of density oscillations at a fixed point per unit time is 
the frequency of the sound wave.
y The time taken for one complete density oscillation at a fixed point is 
defined as the time period of the wave.
y The amplitude of a sound wave is the maximum change in air density 
in a compression (or a rarefaction) compared to the average density.
y The amount of sound energy passing through a unit area 
perpendicular to the direction of the propagation of sound wave in 
a unit time is called the intensity of sound.
y The speed of sound can be defined as the distance which a point on a 
wave, such as a crest (or a trough), travels in unit time. 
y Echoes and reverberations are heard because of the reflection of 
sound from various surfaces.
y Sound waves with frequency below 20 Hz are called infrasonic waves. 
Sound waves with frequency above 20 kHz are called ultrasonic 
waves.
Chapter-10.indd 204 03-Apr-26 8:05:27 PM
