Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications 207
y Many people use earphones extensively these days. Find out the 
research studies that might have been done to understand the impact 
of excessive use of earphones on hearing (if any). Also, find out how 
hearing is tested and what are the decibel ranges for defining mild, 
moderate and severe hearing loss. What are the government schemes 
for purchasing or fitting of aids or appliances and free cochlear 
implants? Write an article on your findings.
y Make a cone using a poster paper or cardboard and adhesive tape. 
Cover a mobile phone that is playing music with the cone. Compare 
the loudness of the sound with and without the cone. You can also use 
another mobile phone with an app to measure the characteristics of the 
sound in both cases. Try experimenting with different shapes and record 
your observations. (This activity is to be facilitated by the teacher.)
y How does the curved design of ceilings and walls behind the stage 
in concert and conference halls improve the quality of sound for the 
audience compared to flat surfaces? You may consult an architect or 
search it on the internet.
y Carry out a simple activity to measure the speed of sound, along with a 
friend in a large open ground of size 200 m or more. (This activity is to 
be facilitated by the teacher.)
(i) Your friend stands at one end of the open ground with the 
balloons, while you stand at the other end with the stopwatch.
(ii) Signal your friend to burst one balloon. When you see the balloon 
burst, start the stopwatch. As soon as you hear the ‘pop’ sound of 
the bursting balloon, stop the timer and note down the reading.
(iii) Repeat this experiment multiple times and take the average value 
of the times noted.
(iv) Note the approximate distance between you and your friend using 
a map application on a mobile phone.
(v) Divide the distance measured with the average time to get the 
average speed of sound. What value of speed did you get from the 
experiment? Compare it with the speed of sound in air, which is 
typically about 346 m s–1 at 25 °C.
(vi) Why did you measure the time between ‘seeing’ and ‘hearing’ the 
balloon burst?
y Explore the internet resources to explore the effect of humidity and 
temperature on the speed of sound. Some such resources are: 
(i) https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/sound-waves/
(ii) https://musiclab.chromeexperiments.com/Experiments
(iii) https://phyphox.org/experiments
The Journey Beyond
Chapter-10.indd 207 03-Apr-26 8:05:30 PM
