198
Understanding Society: 
India and Beyond 
Grade 9 – Part 1
different prices, we get the market demand curve DmDm’ as shown 
in Fig. 9.3 (b). 
DON’T MISS OUT
Did you notice that the market demand curve is flatter than 
Srivalli’s individual demand curve? Why is that? Market demand 
aggregates many consumers, so the same price change creates 
a larger total quantity response. When the price falls from ₹150 
to ₹50, Srivalli’s demand increases by 2 kg, but market demand 
increases by 12 kg, making the market curve flatter and more 
responsive.
Other Determinants of Demand 
When a new model of a popular smartphone is launched, long 
queues and pre-bookings indicate the rush to buy it, even if it is more 
expensive. So, the demand for a product does not necessarily change 
only because of price. Many other factors influence how much people 
want to buy, even when the price of the good or service remains the 
same. Let us see some of these factors at play.
Price of related goods
The demand for a good can be affected by changes in the prices of 
related goods. There are two types of related goods:
a) Substitute goods – These goods can replace each other, like tea 
and coffee. If tea’s price remains the same while coffee becomes 
more expensive, people who consume coffee may switch to 
tea, thereby increasing its demand. If Srivalli cannot afford 
to buy mangoes at the market price, she may buy bananas. 
When the price of a good rises, people tend to replace it with 
another relatively cheaper alternative. Hence, if the price of 
the substitute good increases, the demand for the other related 
good will increase. 
b) Complementary goods – These goods are generally used together 
to provide utility to the consumer, for instance, smartphones 
and earphones, or cars and petrol. If the demand for printers 
increases, the demand for printer cartridges may also rise, even 
though the price of cartridges remains unchanged. Similarly, if 
movie tickets become more expensive, people may refrain from 
going to the cinema, so demand for popcorn sold in cinema halls 
may also fall. 
Related goods: 
Products whose 
demand is 
interconnected, 
meaning a change 
in the price or 
availability of one 
directly affects 
the demand for 
the other.
Chapter 9.indd 198 18-Jun-26 11:33:30 AM
