199
9 – The Price Puzzle: 
What Drives the 
Market
Income of the consumer
When household income rises, consumers can afford to buy more 
or choose higher-quality products. A rise in income generally makes 
people feel more confident about their ability to spend, so the 
quantity demanded for several goods rises, even if prices remain 
the same. 
Taste and preference of the buyer
Every consumer has specific tastes and preferences for certain 
products, which determine their demand. For example, Srivalli likes 
mangoes and cannot substitute them by oranges, even if oranges are 
cheaper than mangoes. 
The demand also depends on the size and composition of the nation’s 
population. For example, being the most populous nation, India’s 
domestic consumer demand contributes to its economic growth. 
In addition, the population’s composition shapes the demand for 
types of products and services. More children indicate increased 
demand for sports shoes, more working adults means a higher 
demand for formal shoes, and more elderly people imply a higher 
demand for comfortable or orthopaedic shoes.
THINK ABOUT IT 
What happens when you consume the first mango? It tastes 
delicious, right? The second one is good? The third one and so on? 
You are barely interested in eating mangoes by this point. Why do 
you think this happens?
This is because the additional utility or usefulness derived from 
a product declines as more of it is consumed. This is known as 
the diminishing marginal utility principle in economics. As the 
utility derived from a successive quantity of products falls, the 
willingness to pay for the products also decreases, so demand falls.
Seasonality
Have you seen crowded bookshops at the beginning of the new 
academic session? Or customers flocking to sweet shops during the 
festive season? Or sweaters and jackets being demanded during the 
winter season? This is because individuals may demand different 
products at different times of the year, and these changes often depend 
on weather, festivals, and cultural habits rather than the price of 
the good. 
Chapter 9.indd 199 18-Jun-26 11:33:30 AM
