206
Understanding Society: 
India and Beyond 
Grade 9 – Part 1
Price ceiling: 
An imposed 
price control 
that sets the 
maximum 
amount a seller 
can charge for 
a product or 
service.
Price floor: An 
imposed limit on 
how low a price 
can be charged 
for a product, 
good, or service. 
For a price floor 
to be effective, 
it must be set 
above the market 
equilibrium price.
Monopoly: 
A market 
structure with 
a single seller 
or producer 
controlling the 
entire supply of 
a unique product 
or service, 
facing no close 
substitutes, 
allowing them 
significant power 
to set prices and 
output.
Role of Government in the Economy 
Today, India is the fourth-largest economy in the world. It is a 
market-based, regulated economy in which prices depend on 
demand and supply. However, markets do not always work fairly. 
Markets allocate goods and services based on willingness and 
ability to pay. Suppose essential goods like medicines become very 
expensive, will they be accessible to all? In such cases, fairness and 
equity in allocation are required, particularly to ensure the welfare 
of vulnerable and low-income groups. 
So, the government plays an important role in the economy in the 
following key aspects.
Regulation of Unfair Practices 
The government regulates unfair practices to protect consumers, 
workers, and producers from exploitation and injustice. For 
example, the government sets maximum prices (price ceiling) for 
essential goods like medicines to prevent overcharging. Similarly, the 
government sets a minimum wage to ensure workers earn enough 
for their hard work. This lower limit is known as the price floor. 
Sometimes a single or a few sellers dominate the market; they can 
charge higher prices and supply less than a competitive market 
would. This form of monopoly would be detrimental to consumer 
welfare as it may charge higher prices, provide poorer quality 
of goods and services, restrict supply, and so on. The government 
regulates such practices by keeping the prices and quantity supplied 
in check.
THINK ABOUT IT
Have you ever seen or heard of the government fixing prices or 
wages (for example, bus fares, medicines, or minimum wages)? 
Share an example and why you think it was done.
Many regulators such as the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for banking, 
the Central Consumer Protection Authority for violation of consumer 
rights and unfair trade practices, the Telecom Regulatory Authority 
of India (TRAI) for the telecommunications sector, the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) for the securities market, 
and so on, ensure transparency in the market. Do you remember 
some regulators from the Grade 7 Social Science textbook 
chapter ‘Understanding Markets’?DON’T MISS OUT
Chapter 9.indd 206 18-Jun-26 11:33:46 AM
