207
9 – The Price Puzzle: 
What Drives the 
Market
During COVID-19, the demand for sanitisers surged, leading to 
stockouts and sharp price increases. Some shopkeepers began 
hoarding and black-marketing. The government intervened by 
declaring sanitisers essential commodities under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955, capping the maximum retail price at ₹100 
for 200 ml bottles. Meanwhile, many companies started production, 
and sanitisers soon became widely available at fair prices. How do 
such price controls affect suppliers and consumers? While in this 
case the price control was for an emergency, do you think such 
controls should be in practice forever?
Provision of Public Goods 
Public goods are goods and services that are provided by the 
government for the benefit of all citizens, for example, roads, 
bridges, public parks, and streetlighting are provided for public 
use; national defence protects the country from external threats; 
sanitation, and drainage systems improve living conditions, and 
so on. These goods are usually not provided by private companies 
because they do not generate direct profit.
Suppose your neighbourhood needs a park. Building it is expensive, 
but many families would benefit from it. If each family contributed 
₹5,000, the park could be built. However, many families may think, 
“If others pay, the park will be built anyway, and I can use it without 
paying.” Because of this thinking, not enough money is collected, and 
the park is never built even though everyone needs it. This explains 
why goods that benefit everyone often require government provision 
or funding to ensure social welfare, economic development, and 
equal access to essential services. 
LET’S EXPLORE
From your surroundings, list two goods or services that are provided 
by the government (for example: roads, streetlights, parks, police, 
and so on.). Choose one of the goods you listed and answer: 
Æ Who does benefit from it? 
Æ Why would it be difficult for a private company to provide this 
service on its own?
Æ Imagine the government stops providing this good or service, 
what problems might people in your area face?
Hoarding:
Accumulation 
of goods, 
commodities, 
or money by 
individuals, 
or firms 
beyond what 
is immediately 
necessary, 
typically driven 
by fear of future 
shortages, 
anticipated 
price increases, 
or speculative 
motives.
Black marketing: 
The illegal trade 
of goods and 
services that 
are banned or 
regulated.
Chapter 9.indd 207 18-Jun-26 11:33:47 AM
