Adolescence: A Stage of Growth and Change
77
Now, we have understood some of the changes that take place 
during adolescence, particularly those that are easily observable. 
Some of these characteristic changes, like change in voice, the growth 
of facial and chest hair in boys, and the development of breasts 
in girls are not directly involved in the process of reproduction. 
However, these characteristic changes help distinguish males 
from females. For this reason, they are called secondary sexual 
characteristics.
Secondary sexual characteristics are natural signs that the 
body is preparing for adulthood. They mark the onset of puberty. 
Puberty is the stage in which the body of an adolescent undergoes 
external and internal changes to develop into an adult capable of 
reproduction. 
6.2 Changes that Indicate Reproductive 
Capability
Adolescence is marked not only by observable changes but also 
by internal changes that are not visible from the outside. One such 
change is the maturation of various parts involved in the process 
of reproduction.
Both boys and girls experience such changes gradually, and 
these changes are a natural part of the process of growing up. 
An important internal change associated with adolescent girls is 
the onset of the menstrual cycle. It recurs generally every 28–30 
days and is more commonly known as ‘the period’. Many healthy 
girls may have longer or shorter menstrual cycles ranging from 
21–35 days. The menstrual cycle is an important natural process 
and is one of the signs of good reproductive health. The phase of 
the cycle when blood discharge occurs from the body is referred 
to as menstruation. It may last for three to seven days. Some girls 
may feel pain or discomfort in the lower abdomen during these 
days. Usually, by the age of 45–55, menstruation stops naturally, 
marking the end of the reproductive capability in a woman’s life.
Breaking myths about menstruation
There are many wrong beliefs about menstruation that 
often lead to unnecessary fear, shame, or even guilt. These 
beliefs have given rise to certain myths and taboos. Among 
such myths and taboos, physical isolation of menstruating 
girls is unfortunately still quite prevalent. Menstruation is a 
natural process, and such myths have no scientific basis. By 
encouraging a scientific outlook towards menstruation, we can 
help society appreciate the need to promote good reproductive 
health of women and contribute positively towards a healthier 
lifestyle for women.
Chapter 6.indd 77 04-04-2025 04:25:33
Reprint 2026-27
