Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
80
Science and Society
Adolescents, especially girls, may sometimes suffer from 
blood-related health problem(s) because of a deficiency of 
iron or vitamin B12 in the body.
™ Find out about such health problem(s).
™ How can we manage iron deficiency in our body?
™ Find out about government schemes aimed to prevent 
such deficiencies.
Know a Scientist
Dorothy Hodgkin was a brilliant scientist who studied 
the structure of vitamin B12. In 1964, she became the third 
woman to win the Nobel Prize in the 
field of chemistry. Did you know that 
vitamin B12 is required for the proper 
functioning of the human body? Like 
most vitamins, it cannot be made in the 
human body and has to be obtained 
from the food we eat. Discuss the sources 
of vitamin B12 with your teacher.
6.4.2 Personal hygiene
Besides nutrition, personal hygiene is also crucially important during 
adolescence. Maintaining body hygiene, particularly in the armpits 
and the pubic region, may protect us from potential infections.
For girls, maintaining proper hygiene during menstruation 
is essential for both comfort and health. Menstrual hygiene can 
be maintained using items such as sanitary pads (Fig. 6.1) and 
reusable cloth pads designed for this purpose.
The government also attempts to provide these products free 
of charge or at a low price to improve the menstrual hygiene of 
girls and women. As a society, we should all make efforts to ensure 
the availability of necessary facilities in schools and public places 
to promote menstrual hygiene. Collectively, we should move 
forward, reducing any stigma around sanitary pads and helping 
in menstrual hygiene.
It is important to dispose of used sanitary pads properly by 
wrapping them in newspaper and disposing inside a dustbin. This 
is to ensure community health and environmental cleanliness. 
These days, biodegradable sanitary pads are also available that 
are environment-friendly.
Fig. 6.1: Sanitary pad
Chapter 6.indd 80 16-09-2025 04:07:35
Reprint 2026-27
