Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
84
Using these substances can cause serious health problems, 
such as breathing difficulties, memory loss, and damage to the 
lungs (Fig. 6.5), depending on the substance. To stay healthy, it is 
important to completely avoid these substances and make healthy 
choices instead. It is important to remain firm and confident in 
your decision to say ‘NO’. 
The first step to overcoming addiction is seeking help and 
support from family and friends, and talking to trusted people, 
such as parents or teachers. Counselling and medical advice can 
also be helpful in handling such situations. Remember, your 
health and your future are in your hands—choose wisely! 
Science and Society
Nasha Mukt Bharat Abhiyaan
The Nasha Mukt Bharat Abhiyaan was launched by the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of India. It 
intends to reach out to the masses and spread awareness on the 
issue of avoiding substance abuse through active participation of 
the youth, women, and the community. The special focus is on the 
prevention of substance abuse among early-age children. 
The Government has launched a National De-addiction Helpline— 
14446, to deal with drug addiction and to help drug addicts.
6.5 The ‘Why’ Question for Adolescence
But I wonder why these 
changes occur at this stage 
of life!
We now understand the different 
changes in adolescence and also know 
some ways to handle it with a sense of 
responsibility.
Many changes in adolescence, including menstruation and 
other signs of puberty, are mainly due to hormones—certain 
chemicals produced in our bodies. Hormones play a crucial 
role in regulating various aspects of growth and development, 
contributing to the proper functioning of the body. They are 
produced in different parts of the body and are released at an 
appropriate time in response to signals from the brain. Some 
hormones influence mood and behaviour. 
Chapter 6.indd 84 04-04-2025 04:25:42
Reprint 2026-27
