209 Reproduction: How Life Continues
Fig. 11.1: Bryophyllum 
leaf sprouts tiny 
plantlet 
species. In this chapter, we will explore how reproduction takes place in 
different organisms, including humans.
11.1 Asexual Reproduction
Asexual mode of reproduction is seen in many unicellular organisms 
like bacteria, amoeba, yeast and simple multicellular organisms (hydra, 
sponge). It is also seen in many plants. Recall the examples you studied 
in earlier grades.
Many types of plants sprout new shoots and roots from their existing 
parts. For example, plants with fleshy underground stems, such as potato 
and ginger, sprout new plants without producing seeds. Money plant 
stem, sugarcane stem cuttings grow into a new plant, Bryophyllum (Fig. 
11.1) leaves sprout tiny plantlets which eventually grow into new plants. 
All these are examples of vegetative propagation, which means that new 
plants arise from the vegetative parts, i.e., from growing parts of a plant. 
The key point about this type of reproduction is that it involves only one 
parent and hence, produces genetically identical individuals.
11.1.1 How is vegetative propagation in plants helpful in 
agriculture?
Asexual reproduction produces genetically identical individuals. This 
natural process has been adapted by scientists and horticulturists to 
develop several methods of vegetative propagation, such as cutting, 
grafting, layering and tissue culture for growing plants. These methods 
are widely used to efficiently propagate plants, and have significantly 
improved agricultural and horticultural practices. Such methods enable 
farmers to cultivate desirable crops on a large scale.
Activity 11.1: Let us explore
1. Interact with gardeners working in your school garden or farmers 
working in a field.
2. Observe the techniques of cutting, grafting and layering followed 
by them. Discuss these techniques with them and record your 
observations in your notebook.
Cutting
1. Note the following points while observing the technique of cutting in 
the field.
(i) Does the gardener, scientist or horticulturist cut the overgrown 
branches of a plant at the end of its growing season? (Different 
plants have different growing seasons).
(ii) Observe them prepare the cuttings from a plant for the purpose of 
growing new plants. Note the average length of the cuttings.
(iii) Count the number of nodes and internodes on the cuttings.
2. Collect the cuttings of the shoots in the morning for planting.
3. Remove leaves from the lower half of each cutting.
4. Insert the cuttings up to approximately half of their length in the soil mixed 
with compost at an angle of about 45– 60° from the soil surface (Fig. 11.2).
5. Water them regularly and observe the change, if any. 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 13
Fig. 11.2: Cutting
Chapter-11.indd 209 04-04-2026 17:38:56
