211 Reproduction: How Life Continues
Activity 11.2: Let us explore
1. Take 20 mL of sugar solution (1 g in 10 mL) in a test tube.
2. Add a pinch of yeast granules to it and then place a cotton plug on the 
mouth of the test tube.
3. Keep it undisturbed in a warm place to allow the yeast to become active.
4. After 1 – 2 hours, place a small drop of the yeast mixture from the test 
tube onto a glass slide and mount it with a coverslip.
5. Observe the slide under a compound microscope at different 
magnifications and draw a diagram of what you observe.
Do you observe any small, round outgrowths (buds) emerging from the 
parent yeast cells as shown in Fig. 11.6? Do these features indicate that the 
yeast is duplicating? How do these observations help you in understanding 
reproduction in yeast?
In organisms, such as hydra (a multicellular animal), repeated cell 
division at a specific site on the parent body produces a small outgrowth 
called a bud (Fig. 11.7). The bud enlarges and separates from the parent 
to live independently. This process is called budding. In hydra, one can 
often see many buds growing on the parent’s body at the same time. 
Are there other methods of asexual reproduction in organisms? You 
have learnt that food like fruits get rotten by microbes (fungi). Where else 
do we find these microorganisms? You may have noticed that, if you leave 
cooked food on the kitchen counter for a day in warm weather, it starts to 
smell and may even grow fuzzy patches. Black patches are often seen on 
a damp wall. These are microorganisms. Where do these microorganisms 
come from? For long, people thought living things arose spontaneously 
from non-living matter. Experiments by Louis Pasteur proved that new life 
always comes from pre-existing life. He found the germ theory of disease, 
strengthened the cell theory (all cells arise from pre-existing cells), and led 
to practices like food and instrument sterilisation. We can explore how these 
microogranisms reproduce more closely by performing a simple activity 
that you can conduct at home or in school.
Activity 11.3: Let us experiment
1. Take a small slice of bread or a roti and lightly moisten it with a few 
drops of water. 
2. Prepare a moist chamber using a plastic box or steel dabba. Place a 
thin layer of cotton in it, cover it with tissue paper and moisten it with 
pre-boiled water. Put the slice of bread or roti on the wet cotton bed 
covered with tissue paper.
3. Keep the moist chamber in a warm and dark place, away from direct 
sunlight (if the bread or roti starts drying, add a few drops of water to 
keep it moist).
4. Observe the bread or roti every day for any changes. Record your 
observations without touching it directly.
5. After three days, observe the surface of the bread or roti carefully 
using a magnifying glass. Do you notice the growth of mould?
6. When enough mould grows and spreads on it, carefully take the box to 
the school laboratory. 
Fig. 11.6: Yeast with 
outgrowths
Fig. 11.7: Budding in 
hydra
Chapter-11.indd 211 03-Apr-26 8:08:47 PM
