212 Exploration|Grade 9
We kept the moist 
chamber warm (25 – 35 °C) 
because spores of mould 
present in the air need 
warmth and moisture to 
grow on bread or roti. 
Lower temperatures 
slow or stop their 
reproduction. This is why, 
we refrigerate perishable 
food. Before refrigerators 
became common about 
100 years ago, fresh 
food lasted only 1 – 2 
days. Refrigeration 
(including deep freezing) 
revolutionised food 
habits, enabling year￾round availability of 
fruits, vegetables, and 
dairy products, while 
preventing their spoilage 
from moulds and 
bacteria.
Threads of 
Curiosity
Do you observe thread-like structures with a round 
sac at the tip? Do you also see tiny round structure 
(spores) inside the sac? Where did the mould on your 
bread slice come from? It was not present when the bread was 
fresh. You may have observed fungi growing on rotten fruits 
or while preparing manure. In these cases, fungi grew due to 
spores present in the air. Similarly, in the case of bread, the 
mould grew from the spores already present in the air, which 
settled on the moist bread and began reproducing rapidly. 
Spores are formed in a sac-like structure (Fig. 11.8a) or on a 
swollen vesicle on a long strip of fungal hyphae (Fig. 11.8b).
Spores are produced in huge numbers (millions from one 
mould colony). Spores are lightweight, usually single-celled 
and float easily through air currents, waiting for moisture and 
nutrients to germinate quickly into a new individual.
In all the organisms studied so far in this chapter, the 
central process behind asexual reproduction is mitosis, a type 
of cell division that produces two daughter cells, each having 
the same number of chromosomes identical to the parent cell. 
Because of this, the offspring produced are genetically identical 
to the parent and are called clones. This method is fast and 
helps organisms increase their population quickly, especially 
when environmental conditions are favourable.
11.2 Sexual Reproduction
Sexual reproduction involves two parents in the formation of 
a new individual. This means both parents contribute to the 
genetic material of the offspring. However, if each generation 
were to receive the full set of chromosomes from both the 
parents, the chromosome number would double in every 
generation. This biological problem is solved by a special type of 
cell division known as meiosis. 
7. With the help of a needle, carefully transfer 
a little mould onto a microscope slide. Under 
the guidance of your teacher, add cotton blue 
stain — a coloured dye to help see it better.
8. Observe the mould under the microscope 
and draw its diagram based on your 
observations.
9. Compare the diagram you have drawn with 
Fig. 11.8 and share your observations with 
your classmates.
(a) Rhizopus
Sac Spores
(b) Aspergillus
Fig. 11.8: Fungi
Hyphae
Bridging Science and Society
Moulds on bread may look unpleasant but fungi benefit society greatly. Fungi grow very 
fast by spore formation and degrade organic wastes and pollutants. Fungi also play an 
important role in removal of heavy metals from industrial wastes. Many antibiotics are 
derived from fungi (penicillin and amoxicillin), saving countless lives from bacterial 
infections. Do you know any fungus that can degrade plastic?
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 2
Chapter-11.indd 212 03-Apr-26 8:08:48 PM
