213 Reproduction: How Life Continues
11.2.1 How does meiosis help create variations in sexual 
reproduction?
Each species has a fixed number of chromosomes in their cells. 
Chromosomes are thread-like structures present in the nucleus of a cell and 
they carry genetic information. Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes, 
that means, each pair consists of one chromosome each from two different 
individuals — with a total of 46 chromosomes. 
Meiosis is a special type of cell division that forms gametes. In meiosis, 
the chromosome number of a parent cell (diploid) is reduced to half 
(haploid) in daughter cells. The resulting haploid cells are used only for 
reproduction and are called gametes. In animals, male gametes are called 
sperm and female gametes are called eggs. You have learnt about them 
already. In plants, the pollen grain contains male gametes and delivers them 
to an ovule which contains the female gametes (eggs). During meiosis, the 
chromosomes of each pair separate so that each gamete receives only one 
chromosome from each pair. This means that every human gamete has 
23 chromosomes, each carrying genetic information for many characters. 
How many combinations of characters can gametes carry?
Activity 11.4: Let us explore
1. Take three pairs of beads of different colours (Fig. 11.9), each pair 
representing two contrasting characters on different chromatids of 
different chromosomes, such as:
y Pair 1 (green): One light green bead and one dark green bead 
representing blonde and black hair colour, respectively on different 
chromatids of chromosome 1.
y Pair 2 (blue): One light blue bead and one dark blue bead representing 
straight and curly hair, respectively on different chromatids of 
chromosome 2. 
y Pair 3 (red): One light red bead and one dark red bead representing 
brown and black eye colour, respectively on different chromatids of 
chromosome 3.
2. Make a combination from it by randomly picking one bead from each 
pair.
3. Write your combination as ‘light green, 
light blue, light red’.
4. How many combinations can you make 
with just these three pairs of characters? 
Each time you make a combination 
using beads, you will get either the 
same combination or a different one. 
With just three pairs of characters, eight 
combinations are possible. 
5. Imagine how many combinations are 
possible with 23 pairs of chromosomes, 
each carrying genetic information for 
many characters.
This random mixing provides many 
combinations, making children genetically different from their parents 
and also from their siblings. Each of us receives a unique combination of 
Fig. 11.9: Understanding the segregation of characters 
during the formation of gamete by meiosis
Blonde and straight hair with brown eyes
Pair 1 (Green) Pair 2 (Blue) Pair 3 (Red)
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 13
Chapter-11.indd 213 03-Apr-26 8:08:49 PM
