214 Exploration|Grade 9
chromosomes. This creates variation among individuals, which is important 
for the survival of a species. Variation helps some individuals adapt better to 
changing environments and over time, this process contributes to evolution. 
For example, some people can tolerate low oxygen levels at high altitudes, or 
digest milk in their adulthood.
11.2.2 Sexual reproduction in flowering plants
Flowering plants, also called angiosperms, are the most diverse group of 
plants on the Earth. Flowers serve as reproductive organs in angiosperms, 
however, non-flowering plants like pines also reproduce sexually. You will 
study them in the next chapter. 
Look at the herbs, shrubs and trees in your surroundings. Their leaves 
perform photosynthesis, their roots absorb water and nutrients from the 
soil, and their stems provide strength to the plant, these are some of the 
functions of a plant. Flowers also enhance the aesthetics of the plants as 
they are coloured and/or fragrant. How are these features of flowers useful 
for reproduction? 
Explore flowers and their buds on some plants. Record your 
observations in your notebook. Do you observe thin, flat, green covering, 
and coloured projections present in both? 
In flower buds, the coloured projections are 
often covered by a green covering. In the bud 
stage, green covering around all the parts 
is the outermost whorl of the flower. This 
structure is called a sepal. Do you think that 
sepals protect flowers in the bud stage, along 
with other parts of the flower when it blooms? 
The coloured projections of flowers are called 
petals (Fig. 11.10). Do all flowers have these 
two parts? What are the other parts of a flower?
Activity 11.5: Let us explore
1. Collect different types of flowers from your surroundings.
2. Carefully observe each part of the flowers you have collected, starting 
from the outer whorl to the inner one.
3. Record the presence of various floral parts in the different flowers 
that you collected in Table 11.1.
Table 11.1: Observation table to study the parts of a flower
S. No. Flower parts
Presence of floral parts in different 
flowers Other 
feature(s)
Guess the 
function of 
flower part A B C D
1. Sepal Yes
2. Petal Yes
3. Stamen No
4. Pistil Yes
Fig. 11.10: Longitudinal section of a flower 
showing its different parts
Petal Pistil
Sepal
Style
Ovary
Anther
Stamen
Filament Stigma
Chapter-11.indd 214 03-Apr-26 8:08:49 PM
