215 Reproduction: How Life Continues
4. Analyse the function of each part of the flower based on visible 
characters.
5. Cut a transverse and a longitudinal section of the ovary (swollen base of 
the pistil) and observe it under a dissecting microscope.
6. Record any other feature(s) in Table 11.1.
7. Draw a diagram of the structure you observed under the microscope.
A complete flower has four parts — sepals, petals, stamens and pistil. You 
might have noticed that in some flowers both sepals and petals are fused. 
Can you guess the function of the most attractive part of a flower — the 
coloured petals? The stamen is the male part (Fig. 11.10). It consists of a 
filament and an anther, which produces pollen grains containing male 
gametes. The pistil is the female part that has three subparts — stigma, style 
and ovary (Fig. 11.11). The stigma is located at the tip, and may be flat and/
or sticky. The style is a thin long tube which connects the stigma to the 
ovary. The ovary contains ovules and each ovule has an egg cell (female 
gamete). You have learnt that the transfer of pollen from stamen to stigma 
is essential for the formation of fruits. How can you investigate it?
Activity 11.6: Let us investigate
1. Identify sweet pea (matar) or garden pea plants in a garden or a 
nearby field.
2. Select two juvenile (less developed) flower bud and three freshly 
blossomed flowers on the same pea plant.
3. Carefully remove the stamens from one of the two selected flowers 
buds and one of the three selected flowers.
4. Take muslin cloth bags and loosely wrap them around the flower bud, 
the flower bud of which stamens are removed, the flower of which 
stamens are removed and a freshly blossomed flower (Fig. 11.12).
5. Leave one freshly blossomed flower uncovered (without muslin 
cloth bag).
6. Observe them regularly and notice the development of fruits in place 
of the flowers that were not covered with muslin cloth. Allow them to 
grow for a few more days.
7. Once the pods are fully developed in the flowers without muslin 
cloth, remove the muslin cloth from all the wrapped flowers and 
observe them.
8. Note your observations in Table 11.2.
Table 11.2: Observation table to study pollination in a pea plant
Treatments
Flower bud 
(wrapped 
with muslin 
cloth bag)
Flower bud with 
removed stamens 
(wrapped with 
muslin cloth bag)
Flower with 
removed stamens 
(wrapped with 
muslin cloth bag)
Flower 
(wrapped 
with muslin 
cloth bag)
Flower 
(without 
muslin 
cloth bag)
Fruit formation 
(Yes/No)
In which treatment(s) do you find the flowers are replaced by fruits? 
What can we infer from this activity? You will notice that fruits are formed 
in place of flowers in all treatments except the one in which the stamens 
were removed from the flower bud. We can infer that the transfer of pollen 
Fig. 11.11: Structure of 
a pistil
Ovule Ovary
Style
Stigma
Fig. 11.12: Experimental 
set-up for pollination
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 12
Chapter-11.indd 215 04-04-2026 17:38:58
