216 Exploration|Grade 9
grains from the anther to the stigma is necessary for fruit formation. 
The transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of a flower 
is called pollination.
11.2.3 How does the process of pollination occur in 
flowers?
In the Activity 11.6, we stated that the process of pollination is the 
transfer of pollen to the stigma of a flower. The transfer of pollen 
occurs to the stigma of the same flower or another flower of the same 
plant, is called self-pollination (Fig. 11.13).
If the pollen is transferred from the anther of a flower of one plant 
to the stigma of a flower of another plant of the same type, the 
pollination is called cross-pollination (Fig. 11.13).
The transfer of the pollen grains to the stigma is important for 
the formation of fruits and seeds. Nature has provided plants with 
various strategies for pollination to occur. What do you think will 
happen if pollination does not occur?
11.2.4 Pollination strategies and reproductive success
Pollination depends on external agents called pollinators, such as 
wind, water, insects (bees, butterflies), or birds. Pollination by wind 
is seen in plants like wheat, maize and rice, where pollen grains are 
light and small, produced in large numbers, and the stigma is long 
and feathery to trap them. In aquatic plants, such as Vallisneria and 
Hydrilla, pollination occurs through water, with currents carrying the 
pollen from one flower to another. Many plants, including sunflower, 
hibiscus and marigold are pollinated by insects, such as bees and 
butterflies. Their flowers are often brightly coloured, produce nectar, 
and give off fragrance to attract pollinators. The pollen grains are 
large, sticky or spiny, so they can attach to the insect’s body and the 
stigma is also sticky to receive them. Some flowers like those of the 
coral tree and hibiscus plant, are pollinated by birds, such as Indian 
white-eye and sunbirds. Let us see how fruits and seeds are formed.
11.2.5 Fertilisation and seed formation
Once the pollen reaches a compatible stigma, a remarkable process 
begins. Pollen grains produce pollen tubes that grow down through 
the style into the ovary. The male gamete moves through this tube 
and arrives at the ovule, where it fuses with the egg cell (Fig. 11.14). 
This fusion of gametes is referred to as fertilisation and it marks 
the beginning of a new life. The fertilised egg is called a zygote, 
which later develops into an embryo. In the meantime, the ovary 
surrounding the ovules enlarges and develops into a fruit, 
while the ovules develop into seeds inside it (Fig. 11.15). 
Seed dispersal takes place by wind or water and animals.
When conditions like water, air and temperature are 
favourable, the seed germinates and grows into a new plant. 
Thus, sexual reproduction not only produces new plants but 
also creates variation, helping plant species survive and adapt 
to their environment.
Fig. 11.13: Self and
Cross-pollination
Self-pollination
Cross-pollination
Stigma Anther
Ovary
Stigma
Male 
germ cell
Egg cell
Pollen tube
Fig. 11.14: Germination of 
pollen on stigma 
Ovule
Pollen grain
Fig. 11.15: Transformation of an 
ovary to a fruit
Chapter-11.indd 216 15-04-2026 12:26:16
