217 Reproduction: How Life Continues
What is the approximate success rate of the common strategies — wind 
pollination and insect pollination — with respect to the seed formation?
Activity 11.7: Let us find out
Studies of pollen production and seed formation by two different 
pollination strategies in different flowers show the following approximate 
trends (Table 11.3) —
Table 11.3: Pollen production and seed formation data
Pollination strategy Approximate pollen 
grains released per flower
Estimated average 
number of seeds formed
Wind-pollinated grasses 
(e.g., maize, wheat) 5,00,000 –10,00,000 50 –200
Insect-pollinated plants 
(e.g., sunflower) 20,000 – 40,000 800 –1,000
1. Compare and analyse the two strategies in terms of 
(Table 11.3) —
y Pollen to seed ratio
y Efficiency of pollination and seed formation
2. Explain why producing a very large number of pollen 
grains can still be an effective pollination strategy.
Pause and Ponder
1. In a china-rose (hibiscus or gudhal) plant, 
a pollen tube grows and continues through 
the style after pollen lands on the stigma. 
Which process is about to happen next?
2. Look at the pictures (Fig. 11.16) of calotropis 
(madar) seeds and dandelion seeds given 
below. Can you guess what kind of seed 
dispersal these seeds are adapted for?
3. A farmer plants two varieties of maize side 
by side, but notices that seeds form only 
when pollen from one variety reaches the 
stigma of the other. What type of pollination 
is this? Fig. 11.16
(a) Madar seeds
(b) Dandelion 
seeds
Meet a Scientist
P. Maheshwari, 
known as the 
‘Father of Indian 
Embryology’, 
was a leading 
scientist in the 
field of embryology which is 
the study of plant reproductive 
organs. He developed 
the technique of in-vitro
fertilisation in flowering 
plants by successfully fusing 
an egg and male gamete in a 
test tube to create new hybrid 
plants. He was also one of 
the first scientists to grow 
plant embryos on artificial 
nutrient media. His book, An 
Introduction to the Embryology 
of Angiosperms (1950), became 
a classic and is still widely 
used by scientists around the 
world.
Sexual reproduction in plants has an applied importance in plant breeding. There are several 
methods of plant breeding, such as selective breeding, artificial hybridisation, genetically 
engineered crops, and more. In selective breeding, farmers select plants of desirable characters for 
reproduction. Process of artificial hybridisation involves removal of the stamens from the flowers, 
covering it with a bagging to prevent self-pollination, and manual transfer of the pollens with 
desired characters. Genetic engineering is also applied by inserting the genetic material of desired 
characters into the DNA of the selected varieties. This leads to the development of new varieties, 
such as high yielding varieties, disease resistant varieties, and so on. This has revolutionised crop 
production in agriculture.
Bridging Science and Society
Chapter-11.indd 217 03-Apr-26 8:09:49 PM
