218 Exploration|Grade 9
Fig. 11.17: Life cycle of a butterfly
egg
adult
larva
pupa
emergence
4. Why do animals 
with external 
fertilisation 
generally 
produce 
more eggs 
than animals 
with internal 
fertilisation?
5. In animals, which 
fertilisation 
method the 
gametes are more 
protected?
Pause and 
Ponder
11.3 Sexual Reproduction in Animals
Reproduction in animals takes place through asexual and/or sexual 
method(s). We have studied different methods of asexual reproduction in 
different organisms, such as budding and spore formation, earlier in this 
chapter. 
In many aquatic animals exhibiting sexual reproduction, 
such as frogs and most fish, fertilisation occurs outside the body. 
The female releases eggs into the water, and the male releases 
sperm over eggs for fertilisation to take place. This method of fertilisation 
is called external fertilisation. Although a large number of eggs are 
laid, many are destroyed by water currents or eaten by other animals. 
In reptiles, birds and mammals, fertilisation takes place inside the body 
of the female. This is called internal fertilisation. Here, the chances of 
survival of the young ones are generally higher because the fertilised egg 
or embryo is protected more in internal fertilisation (Table 11.4).
11.4 Variations in Reproduction in Animals
Animals show a wide variety of methods of sexual reproduction. However, 
all animals face the basic challenge of ensuring that the male and the 
female gametes meet, and that the young ones survive long enough to 
grow and reproduce. Study the information given in Table 11.4 for four 
categories of animals. 
Table 11.4: Variation in reproductive strategies among animals
Animal Habitat Mode of fertilisation Number of eggs 
produced
Estimated survival 
of young ones
Fish Water External 100s – 1000s at a time Low
Frog Water/land External 5,000 – 50,000 at a time Low
Lizard Land Internal 2 – 20 at a time Moderate
Bird Water/land Internal 1 – 15 at a time Moderate to High
Fish, amphibians, and insects produce several hundred 
to several thousand eggs at a time with yolk, which contains 
nutritive substances to nourish the developing embryos. The 
mother’s body cannot provide such large quantities of yolk for so 
many eggs. The strategy these species adopt is that the yolk in the 
egg is just enough to produce a larva, which hatches from the egg. 
The larva, then gets nutrition by eating organic wastes like rotten 
food, manures and so on, and grows. This stage is an intermediate 
stage in its development, which is essentially a feeding stage. 
Once enough nutrition is accumulated, a transformation takes 
place and the adult body is formed — as seen in organisms, such 
as butterfly (Fig. 11.17) and frogs.
In contrast, reptiles and birds lay eggs, and each egg contains 
enough yolk to nourish the developing embryo until it hatches 
into a young one. In mammals, the zygote grows and develops 
inside the female body.
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 10
Chapter-11.indd 218 04-04-2026 17:39:16
