219 Reproduction: How Life Continues
In some species, when the young ones are born, they are ready to find 
their own food, whereas in others an extended period of post-hatching or 
post-birth feeding and care is necessary. This broadly depends on how long 
the embryo develops inside an egg or inside the mother’s body. Mammals 
typically feed their young ones via breast milk for some duration after birth.
11.5 Reproduction in Human Beings
11.5.1 Reproductive maturity
You have learnt about the physical and emotional changes that 
take place as a child grows into an adult, when reproductive 
organs mature and begin producing gametes (sperm in male and 
egg in female). 
The human reproductive system consists of special organs
(Fig. 11.18 and Fig. 11.19). When a sperm meets an egg inside the female 
body, they form a zygote that develops into an embryo and eventually into 
a foetus in the uterus. In this section, we will study how gametes form and 
meet, and how new life develops in human beings.
11.5.2 What are the parts of the male reproductive 
system?
The male reproductive system (Fig. 11.18) 
has organs that produce male germ cells 
called sperm and help them transfer to the 
female body. Sperm are produced in two oval-shaped 
organs called testes (testis singular), present in a pouch 
of skin called the scrotum. The scrotum keeps the 
testes slightly cooler than normal body temperature, 
which is necessary for sperm formation. The testes 
also produce a hormone (chemicals that regulate 
different functions), which controls sperm production 
and causes the physical changes seen in boys during 
puberty.
From the testes, sperm travel through a long tube 
called the vas deferens, which ultimately opens into the 
urethra, a common passage for the urine and the sperm. 
Glands like the seminal vesicles and the prostate add 
fluids to nourish the sperm, and help them remain active 
and move. Each sperm has a head containing genetic 
material and a long tail that helps it swim towards 
the egg. 
11.5.3 What are the parts of the female 
reproductive system?
Look at the Fig. 11.19 and identify various parts of the 
female reproductive system. The female reproductive 
system has a pair of ovaries, oviducts (fallopian 
tubes), a uterus, and a vagina. The ovaries produce the 
female germ cells (eggs) and also release hormones. 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 6
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 6
Cervix
Uterus
Fallopian tube
Ovary
Fig. 11.19: Female reproductive 
system
Vagina
Fig. 11.18: Male reproductive system
Vas 
deferens
Urethra
Prostate 
gland
Urinary 
bladder
Testis Scrotum
Seminal vesicle
Penis
Chapter-11.indd 219 04-04-2026 17:39:18
