220 Exploration|Grade 9
The hormones bring about changes during puberty. The 
oviducts connect each ovary to the uterus. The uterus is 
a bag-like structure where a foetus develops. The uterus 
opens into the vagina through a narrow passage called 
the cervix. 
11.5.4 How are reproductive cells made?
The process of the formation of gametes is called 
gametogenesis. It takes place in the testes and the 
ovaries. You have learnt in Activity 11.4 that gametes 
are formed by meiosis, in which the number of 
chromosomes is reduced to half. In humans, cells have 
46 chromosomes, but sperm and eggs have only 23. This 
is important so that when they combine, the zygote 
has the same number of chromosomes as parents to 
form an individual. In males, gametogenesis results 
in the production of numerous tiny motile (moving), 
active sperm. In females, gametogenesis results in the 
formation of a single large egg. In sexual reproduction, 
male and female gametes differ greatly in size, number 
and structure (Table 11.5).
Table 11.5: Structure, size, and number of male and female gametes
Feature Sperm Egg
Size Very small Large
Number produced Millions Few
Stored nutrients Absent Present
Motility Actively motile Non-motile
This asymmetry between the male and female gametes is seen across 
most of the animals.
11.5.5 What happens when a sperm meets an egg?
At birth, a girl’s ovaries already have millions of immature eggs. From 
puberty onwards, usually one mature egg is released every month from 
one of the ovaries. This is called ovulation. Before ovulation, the uterus 
starts to prepare itself; the inner lining becomes thick. As the ovulation 
happens, the egg travels from the ovary to the oviduct. During sexual 
intercourse, millions of sperm enter through the vagina. They swim 
through the reproductive tract and may reach the egg in 
the oviduct. If a sperm encounters an egg and succeeds 
in fusing with it, a zygote is formed (Fig. 11.20). The 
inner lining of the uterus becomes thicker and richer in 
blood vessels. The zygote undergoes a series of mitotic 
divisions while travelling to the uterus, and implants into 
the inner lining of the uterus to receive nourishment for 
development. This implantation marks the beginning 
of pregnancy. 
In-vitro Fertilisation 
(IVF) is a medical 
technique in which 
an egg and a sperm 
are combined 
outside the female 
body, usually in a laboratory 
dish. The resultant fertilised egg 
is then implanted in the uterus 
to begin a possible pregnancy. 
A baby born through this 
method is commonly known 
as a test tube baby, although 
the process actually occurs 
in a culture dish, not in a test 
tube. India holds a significant 
place in the history of IVF. In 
1978, Subhash Mukhopadhyay
of Kolkata pioneered India’s 
first test tube baby, Kanupriya 
Agarwal (nicknamed Durga), 
through experimental IVF work. 
Meet a Scientist
+ =
Egg Sperm Zygote
Fig. 11.20: Process of fertilisation
Chapter-11.indd 220 04-04-2026 17:39:21
