221 Reproduction: How Life Continues
11.5.6 What happens when an egg is not fertilised?
If an egg is not fertilised, it remains viable for about a day and then it 
degenerates. The inner lining of the uterus, which became thick and rich 
with blood vessels to receive and nourish the developing zygote, is no 
longer needed. So, the lining sheds. This lining, along with some blood, 
leaves the body through the vagina. This process is called menstruation
or a period, and usually lasts 3 to 7 days. You have read about this process 
earlier. Now, you can connect it to the events of ovulation and fertilisation.
The cycle of ovulation, preparation of the uterus and menstruation 
repeats typically every 21 – 35 days (often around 28 days), and usually begins 
at puberty, between the ages of 10 – 14 in girls and continues till menopause 
i.e., around age 50 (Fig. 11.21).
Day 1 – 5:
Menstruation
(Shedding of 
uterine lining)
Day 6 – 14:
Uterine lining 
gradually rebuilds
(Egg starts 
maturing in 
ovary)
Day 14:
Ovulation
(Ovary releases a 
mature egg)
Day 15 – 28:
Uterine lining becomes thicker 
and rich with blood vessels
(If no fertilisation happens, it starts 
breaking down on approximately. 
28th day and the cycle repeats)
Fig. 11.21: Key stages of the menstrual cycle across a typical 28-day period
What determines a baby’s biological sex?
So far, you have learnt that every person has two sex chromosomes. Females have XX and 
males have XY chromosomes. The mother always contributes an X chromosome to a baby 
and the father contributes either an X (Female: XX) or a Y (Male: XY) chromosome. Now, from 
the above information, can you predict who determines the sex of a baby?
Threads of Curiosity
Hygiene practices to follow during menstruation (period):
y Use menstrual products, such as sanitary pads (preferably biodegradable ones), tampons, 
menstrual cups, etc.
y Wash regularly — clean your genital area with water. Avoid using soap, as this can disrupt the 
natural bacterial balance.
y Hand washing is the key — always wash your hands with soap and water, before and after 
changing your sanitary pad.
y Proper disposal of used products — wrap used pads in newspaper or the wrapper they came 
in before disposing them in a bin. Do not flush them down the toilet.
y Proper care for reusable products — if you use reusable pads, follow the manufacturer’s 
instructions for cleaning. Ensure reusable pads are completely dry before their next use.
y Change menstrual products regularly — change pads in 4 – 6 hours, or more often if your flow 
is heavy.
Bridging Science and Society
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 8
Chapter-11.indd 221 03-Apr-26 8:09:58 PM
