222 Exploration|Grade 9
11.5.7 Pregnancy and childbirth
Pregnancy in humans lasts about nine months and is divided into 
three stages called trimesters. In the first trimester, the fertilised 
egg develops into an embryo during the first two months and major 
organs start forming during this time. From about the ninth week, 
the developing embryo is called a foetus, which continues to grow 
and develop. In the second trimester, the foetus grows bigger and 
stronger, and the mother can usually feel its movements. In the third 
trimester, the baby grows rapidly and gets ready for the life outside 
the womb (Figure 11.22). The uterus protects and nourishes the 
baby throughout this time. During childbirth, strong contractions 
of the muscles of the uterus help push the foetus out through the 
birth canal. In some cases, if a normal vaginal birth is not possible 
or safe for the mother or the foetus, doctors may use medical or 
surgical procedures to help deliver the baby safely.
1st Trimester 2nd Trimester 3rd Trimester
Fig. 11.22: Stages of pregnancy
After birth, a baby needs special care. Breastfeeding is essential 
because a mother’s milk provides complete nutrition and protects the 
infant from many diseases. Newborns must be kept warm, vaccinated on 
time and handled gently. The mother’s well-being is equally important. 
She requires nutritious food and adequate rest, and it is recommended 
for her to avoid harmful habits, such as smoking, consuming alcohol, or 
taking any medicines without medical advice. The health of the mother 
and the baby are closely connected, and require proper care and support.
6. Ravi suddenly notices that he is growing taller rapidly, his shoulders are broadening, 
and his voice cracks. What stage of life is he entering?
7. Rina’s period occurs every 28 days. Her last period was on the 5th of March. On which 
day is she most likely to get her next period?
8. A human zygote has just formed. How many chromosomes does it have?
Pause and Ponder
11.5.8 Mother’s health during pregnancy
A woman’s health during pregnancy plays a vital role in the baby’s growth 
and safety. She should eat a balanced diet rich in proteins, vitamins and 
minerals, attend regular medical check-ups, and follow her doctor’s 
advice regarding light exercise and rest. Her emotional well-being is also 
important, and support from family members helps her remain healthy 
and stress-free.
Menstruation is a 
sign of a healthy 
reproductive system, 
not something to be 
ashamed of. Using 
clean menstrual 
products, changing 
them as often as 
required, and 
disposing them 
responsibly helps 
in staying healthy 
and keeping your 
surroundings clean. 
Period is your pride
Chapter-11.indd 222 04-04-2026 18:01:48
