223 Reproduction: How Life Continues
More than 10 lakh Accredited Social Health 
Activist (ASHA) workers are health heroes 
across India. These community health workers 
are women trained to promote hygiene, 
immunisation, and family planning under the 
National Health Mission, especially in rural 
areas. They offer advice on maternal care, 
safe deliveries and contraceptive methods.
Threads of Curiosity Bridging Science and Society
Some mothers experience a form of anxiety 
and fatigue after the delivery of a baby. This 
is called post-partum depression, and it is 
a recognised condition that can be treated. 
Mothers should be encouraged to talk to 
a healthcare worker (such as a doctor, 
nurse, or ASHA worker) if they feel low or 
overwhelmed, so that they can get proper 
help and support.
11.5.9 What does it mean to be sexually mature?
As we grow through adolescence, our bodies undergo many changes. 
A significant aspect of this growth is sexual maturation, meaning our 
bodies are becoming capable of reproduction. It is gradual and takes 
place alongside the overall body’s growth but this does not mean we 
are fully ready for adult responsibilities. Sexual maturity (like the 
production of sperm in boys and menstrual cycles in girls) happens 
gradually, but emotional maturity takes longer. Being emotionally 
mature means handling feelings, communicating clearly and making 
thoughtful decisions. 
11.5.10 How can unwanted pregnancies and infections be 
prevented?
During adolescence, the body becomes capable of reproduction but 
emotional and social maturity take longer to develop. Being ready for 
sexual activity is not only about physical changes but also about being able 
to make thoughtful and responsible decisions. Such responsible choices 
help prevent unplanned pregnancies, sexually transmitted infections and 
support healthy relationships.
Since sexual activity involves close physical contact, some infections can 
be transmitted from an infected person to an uninfected person. These are 
called Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) and include gonorrhoea, 
herpes, syphilis, genital warts, and HIV (which can eventually lead to 
AIDS). Some of these are not curable yet. Using condoms can prevent their 
transmission and also help prevent pregnancy. 
To prevent unwanted pregnancy, different 
contraceptive (pregnancy-preventing) methods can 
be used. Some of them act as barriers, like condoms 
or vaginal covers, which stop sperm from reaching the egg. 
Some methods involve medicines (oral pills) that change the 
release of eggs by altering hormones, though these may have 
some side effects. Another method is the use of Intra-Uterine 
Devices (IUDs), such as copper-T that are placed in uterus 
to avoid pregnancy, though they may sometimes irritate the 
uterus (Fig. 11.23). 
Pause and Ponder
  9. What protective 
devices can be used 
during sexual activity 
to reduce the spread of 
STIs?
10. If a couple uses oral 
contraceptive pills but 
not condoms, which 
risks remain and why?
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 6
Chapter-11.indd 223 03-Apr-26 8:10:02 PM
