224 Exploration|Grade 9
Surgical methods are also used to stop unwanted pregnancies. 
These include blocking the vas deferens in males or the fallopian 
tubes in females, so that the sperm and the egg cannot meet. 
In some cases, unwanted pregnancies can be removed by surgery, 
generally only within the first trimester of pregnancy, when the 
embryo is very small. This procedure is called abortion. The 
practice of self-selective abortion is a significant concern, often 
driven by a preference for a specific gender. This practice can 
lead to a marked imbalance in the societal sex-ratio. So, prenatal 
sex determination is strictly prohibited by law in India. 
This is important to maintain sex ratio for healthy forward￾looking society.
Pause and Ponder
11.	 In many animals, the young ones can walk or find food soon after birth but human babies
are completely dependent on adults for a long time. What might be some advantages and 
disadvantages of this for humans as a species?
Bridging Science and Society
Indian scientists at the Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, 
developed the world’s first non-steroidal and non-hormonal oral
contraceptive pill. Taken once weekly, it avoids side effects like 
weight gain, nausea, or headaches. Safe, convenient, and effective, it 
is provided free through the National Family Planning Programme.
At a Glance
y Reproduction is the biological process by which living organisms 
produce new individuals of the same species. It ensures the 
continuity of life and the transfer of genetic information.
y There are two main types of reproduction: asexual and sexual.
y Asexual reproduction occurs in different ways, such as budding, 
spore formation and vegetative propagation in plants.
y A flower is the reproductive organ of a plant, with male stamen and
female pistil.
y Pollination is the process of pollen transfer from anther to stigma, 
through self- or cross-pollination.
y During fertilisation, the pollen tube carries the sperm cells to the 
ovule, where it fuses to form a zygote. After fertilisation, the ovule 
becomes the seed and the ovary becomes the fruit.
y In humans, the testes produce sperm. Glands like testes, seminal 
vesicles and prostate produce male hormones.
y Ovaries produce eggs and female hormones. Ovulation takes place 
around the 14th day of the menstrual cycle.
Fig. 11.23: Intra-Uterine 
Device
Copper-T
Chapter-11.indd 224 28-04-2026 16:00:38
