225 Reproduction: How Life Continues
y Birth control methods include condoms, pills, IUDs (Copper-T), etc.
y If fertilisation occurs, the zygote develops into an embryo and 
pregnancy begins. In human females, pregnancy usually lasts about 
nine months, during which the mother’s body undergoes many 
changes to support the baby’s growth.
y It is important for the mother to have proper nutrition, check-ups 
and rest, avoid harmful substances for the baby’s healthy growth 
and support her own body during pregnancy.
Revise, Reflect, Refine
1. A flower’s anthers are removed before it matures. Later, pollen from 
another plant of the same species is dusted onto its stigma and seeds 
are produced. Which process has been ensured here?
(i) Self-pollination (ii) Cross-pollination
(iii) Fertilisation (iv) Tissue culture
2. Arrange the following stages of sexual reproduction in plants in the 
correct order:
(i) Pollen germination on stigma (ii) Fertilisation
(iii) Pollination (iv) Formation of zygote
3. Assertion (A): The zygote formed after fertilisation immediately 
attaches to the uterus wall.
Reason (R): The uterus wall is always prepared to receive the zygote.
(i) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A. 
(ii) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A. 
(iii) A is true, but R is false. 
(iv) A is false, but R is true.
4. Why does asexual reproduction produce offsprings that are genetically 
identical to the parent?
5. Explain why the menstrual cycle stops during pregnancy.
6. Why are flowers that bloom at night white or light in colour as 
compared to flowers that bloom during the day?
7. Why do vegetatively propagated plants tend to be more vulnerable to 
diseases than sexually reproduced plants?
8. If all flowers in a type of plant were only capable of self-pollination, 
how would it affect the genetic diversity over several generations? 
Explain.
9. A farmer wants to produce a large number of genetically identical 
plants quickly. Suggest suitable reproduction methods and explain 
why they are effective.
Chapter-11.indd 225 03-Apr-26 8:10:08 PM
