226 Exploration|Grade 9
10. Suresh prepares slides with pollen grains in different sugar 
concentrations (0%, 2.5%, 5%, 7.5%, 10%) to study the germination of 
pollen. 
(i) What are the different hypotheses which can be tested using this 
set-up?
(ii) What parameters should be kept the same in this set-up?
11. Look at the picture given below and think in line with the given prompts 
and find out which type(s) of pollination might have been followed in 
these flowers —
Tomato Wheat Papaya
 
Stamens cover the stigma. Flowers open 
after pollination.
Male and female flowers 
are often borne on different 
papaya trees.
12. In the lower Himalayan region of northern India, apples are 
an important cash crop that contribute significantly to farmer’s 
livelihoods. The fruit yield in apple cultivation is declining 
continuously, associated with climate change and a significant decline 
in the population of natural pollinators. A researcher-farmer group set 
up two experimental apple orchards at two distinct locations: Places A 
and B. In apple orchards at Place A, they allowed natural pollinators 
Per cent
to pollinate the flowers of the apple. In apple 
orchards at Place B, they applied mixed 
farming techniques of beekeeping. Along with 
honey, the farmer yielded apples. The yield 
of apples is depicted in Fig. 11.24, in terms of 
fruit setting (number of fruits/the total number 
of corresponding fruit-bearing branches) and 
fruit drop (premature falling of developing 
fruits) in the two types of experimental places 
of apple orchards.
(i) What are the hypotheses the researcher￾farmers group has thought of for this 
investigation?
(ii) What are the different parameters in the 
experiment? 
(iii) Compare and analyse the data of two 
experimental orchards Places A and B, in 
terms of high yields of apple fruits. 
(iv) Based on your analysis, what do you infer from the data? 
13. A student claims, “In humans, ovulation always happens on day 14 of 
the menstrual cycle”. Critically examine this claim and state whether 
the claim is correct or not. Give at least two reasons for your answer.
Chapter-11.indd 226 04-04-2026 17:39:25
