227 Reproduction: How Life Continues
The Journey Beyond
y Read about the ‘Seed Village Programme’ (Beej Gram Yojana) run by 
the Government of India. Why is it important to save indigenous seeds?
y Prepare a report on IVF, its uses and drawbacks. Discuss it with your 
class.
y Conduct a survey on crop fields. Interact with farmers on the crops 
grown on their farms and farm animals based on the following points —
(i) Which crops do they grow through vegetative propagation?
(ii) Which crops do they grow using seeds?
(iii) Which seeds do they use — indigenous varieties or hybrid varieties? 
Why? How do they develop hybrid varieties in their fields?
(iv) List the indigenous breeds and hybrid breeds of the farm animals 
they are using in their farming practices and how are they 
different from each other?
(v) Discuss in class, and make a report on how asexual and sexual 
methods of reproduction are useful in agriculture.
y Explore the crop fields near your school and find out different 
pollination strategies adopted by different cereal and vegetable crop 
plants. Talk to farmers on the following points —
(i) Pollinators of different crops
(ii) Reason for the declining population of pollinators and their 
solutions
Observe the pollinators visiting your school garden. Notice and 
record their activity. Let each student take pictures of at least five 
different types of pollinators and which plants they visit. Compile the 
data and showcase your work to discuss how pollination occurs in 
different plants. 
y Assist your elders in cutting fruits in the kitchen. While cutting fruits 
like lady finger, tomato, brinjal, capsicum, papaya, orange, muskmelon 
and more, make your observations based on the following and draw 
diagrams —
(i) When you cut a fruit longitudinally (Longitudinal Section: L.S.)
(ii) When you cut a fruit transversely (Transverse Section: T.S.)
(iii) Attachment of seeds
Link your observations of the L.S. and T.S. of the fruit with the internal 
structure of the ovary of same species.
Does a unicellular organism like amoeba or yeast ever ‘grow old’? 
When it divides, it produces almost two identical copies. So, does 
aging happen at all?
The Quest Continues … (c) L.S. of Tomato flower
(a) L.S. of Tomato fruit
(b) T.S. of Tomato fruit
Chapter-11.indd 227 15-04-2026 12:26:31
