Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7
154
11.1 Sources of Light
The Sun gives out or emits its own light and is the main source 
of natural light on the Earth. Stars, lightning, natural fi re, and 
certain animals also emit their own light (Fig. 11.1).
In ancient times, humans learnt to create 
fi re — the earliest form of artifi cial lighting. With 
time, they learnt to create 
fi re using diff erent fuels, 
such as animal fat, oil, 
wax, and gas (Fig. 11.2). 
With the invention of 
electricity and diff erent 
kinds of electric light 
sources, most of the 
lighting needs of humans 
are now met by electric 
lighting (Fig. 11.3).
Objects that emit their own light are 
called luminous objects. Objects that 
do not emit their own light are called 
non-luminous objects. The Moon is a 
non-luminous object. It does not emit its 
own light. It just refl ects the light emitted 
by the Sun that falls on it.
SCIENCE AND SOCIETY
Light Emitting Diode (LED) lamps are modern light 
sources that consume much less power, are brighter 
and last longer than traditional lamps. This not 
only reduces electricity bills but is also better for 
environment. Recognising their advantages, the 
Indian government has made substantial eff orts to 
promote the use of LED lamps nationwide. At their 
end of life, LED lamps must be appropriately disposed 
or recycled, and not thrown in the garbage.
and last longer than traditional lamps. This not 
only reduces electricity bills but is also better for 
environment. Recognising their advantages, the 
Indian government has made substantial eff orts to 
promote the use of LED lamps nationwide. At their 
end of life, LED lamps must be appropriately disposed 
or recycled, and not thrown in the garbage.
Fig. 11.3: Some sources of electric light
 objects. The Moon is a 
non-luminous object. It does not emit its 
own light. It just refl ects the light emitted 
by the Sun that falls on it.
Fig. 11.1: Some natural sources of light
Fig. 11.2: Fire as a source 
of artifi cial light
Chapter 11.indd 154 4/3/2025 4:56:26 PM
Reprint 2026-27
