Light: Shadows and Refl ections 
161
11.6 Images Formed in a Plane Mirror
Look into the mirror. Do you see your face in it? What you see is 
a refl ection of your face in the mirror. We also see refl ections of 
other objects that are in front of the mirror. Let us try to fi nd out 
more about this.
Activity 11.7: Let us experiment
 Take a plane mirror and a pen or some other object.
 Place the pen in front of the mirror as shown in 
Fig. 11.10.
What do you see in the mirror? It appears as if a similar 
pen is placed behind the mirror. The pen which appears 
behind the mirror is the image of the pen formed by the 
mirror. The pen itself is the object.
 Now, move the pen to diff erent positions in front of the 
mirror and compare the sizes of the images of the pen at 
each position. 
Are the two sizes the same? The image formed by a plane 
mirror is of the same size as the object.
 Again, move the pen to diff erent positions in front of the 
mirror and observe if the image is upright at each position. 
Does the tip of the pen appear on top at each position? An 
upright image is called erect. An image formed by a plane mirror 
is erect.
 Now, place a screen vertically behind the mirror. Move it 
around. Do you get the image on the screen? Repeat this by 
placing the screen in front of the mirror.
The image formed by a plane mirror cannot be obtained on 
a screen.
Activity 11.8: Let us experiment
 Stand in front of a plane mirror and look at your image 
(Fig. 11.11). Notice how far it appears to be from the mirror.
 Now, stand close to the mirror. Is the image also closer to the 
mirror?
 Stand at diff erent distances from the mirror and notice how 
far the image appears to be from the mirror in each case. 
Do you fi nd any relation between your distance from the 
mirror and the distance of your image from the mirror?
Fig. 11.10: Image of a pen 
in a plane mirror
Fig. 11.11: Observing one’s 
own image in a mirror
Chapter 11.indd 161 4/3/2025 4:56:34 PM
Reprint 2026-27
