229 Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
characteristics, such as drought tolerance, pest resistance and their ability 
to grow in nutrient poor soils. They realised that diversity reduces the risk 
of crop failure and strengthens food security.
In such a vast diversity, organisms share certain similarities while also 
showing many differences. To study diversity systematically, scientists 
group and classify organisms based on their shared characteristics and 
evolutionary relationships. Classification helps us understand how 
organisms are related, how they function and how we can use this 
knowledge in activities, such as ecosystem management, biodiversity 
conservation, sustainable farming, and so on.
12.1 India as a Biodiversity Hotspot
The natural landscape of our country is 
diverse — with mountains in the north, desert 
in the west, rainforests in the North East India, 
plateaus in the south, and long coastlines along 
the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal. Each of 
these regions has distinct soil types and different 
climatic conditions like temperature and rainfall. 
These diverse habitats together support a 
wide variety of species. Some of these species 
are restricted to particular regions of the world 
and are not found naturally anywhere else. Such 
species are called endemic species. For example, 
Nilgiri tahr (Fig. 12.1a), Lion-tailed macaque 
(Fig. 12.1b), Indian variety of the pitcher plant— 
Nepenthes khasiana (Fig. 12.1c) and Neelakurinji 
(Fig. 12.1d) are found only in India.
Regions that support a large number of 
endemic species and have undergone significant 
habitat loss are known as biodiversity hotspots. 
These areas are particularly important for 
biodiversity conservation. Regions, such as the 
Western Ghats, Indo-Burma (including North 
East India), the Himalayas, Sundaland (including 
the Nicobar Islands), are some examples of global biodiversity hotspots. 
These areas are especially rich in number and in the diversity of organisms. 
Protecting these regions is equally important, as they support food webs 
and help ecosystems remain healthy.
12.2 How has the Biodiversity Evolved? 
The biodiversity that we see today on the Earth was not always the same. 
Small differences among individuals affected their chances of survival 
and reproduction by helping them adapt to changed conditions. These 
differences accumulated over many generations and gave rise to new 
forms of life.
The diversity we see today is therefore, an outcome of continuous 
changes occurring over a vast span of time, shaped by interactions between 
Fig. 12.1: (a) Nilgiri tahr, (b) Lion-tailed macaque, 
(c) Nepenthes khasiana, and (d) Neelakurinji
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Chapter-12.indd 229 03-Apr-26 8:11:34 PM
