231 Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
Table 12.1: Observation table for recording the data
Organism 
(draw or write 
name)
Where do you see 
it? (flying high in 
air/flying near the 
ground/tree/water/
forest floor)
When does it 
appear to be 
active? (day/night/
unsure)
Any visible 
feature(s)
Owl Tree Night Feathers
3. Now, try grouping the same organisms in more than one way. Each 
time change the criterion you are using for grouping (Table 12.2).
Table 12.2: Grouping the organisms
The grouping 
criterion
Which organisms fit 
in this group?
What feature or pattern 
helped you decide?
Carnivore Eagle, tiger, leopard Eating habits
You may notice that the same organism can fit into different groups 
depending on the criterion you choose. This leads to an important 
question: how do scientists decide which features to use while grouping 
the living organisms? This question leads us to the idea of classification, a 
systematic way of organising the Earth’s living diversity.
12.3.1 Some criteria to classify living organisms
Scientists often look at broad and easily visible features, and then look 
at more detailed features. They use a number of characteristics to group 
living organisms, some of which are given below:
1. External features — visible characteristics, such as shape, size and 
body organisation.
2. Mode of nutrition — autotrophic or heterotrophic.
3. Internal structures — skeletal patterns, presence or absence of organs 
and different types of tissues.
4. Cell structure — whether the organism is unicellular or multicellular, 
the cell is eukaryote or prokaryote, presence or absence of cell wall.
5. Ecological role — producer, consumer, or decomposer.
6. Reproduction — asexual and/or sexual methods.
7. Genetic similarity — similarities in inherited features, which scientists 
study in detail using DNA.
These features help in understanding the similarities and differences 
among organisms. Similar features in organisms suggest that they have 
evolved from common ancestors. 
1. If many 
organisms 
share common 
features, could 
they also share 
a common 
ancestry?
Pause and 
Ponder
Chapter-12.indd 231 03-Apr-26 8:11:39 PM
