235 Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
y Level of organisation — unicellular or multicellular 
y Mode of nutrition — autotrophic or heterotrophic 
12.6.1. Kingdom Monera — Unicellular prokaryotes
Activity 12.4: Let us explore
1. In the school laboratory, observe the available permanent slides of 
bacteria and cyanobacteria under the microscope.
2. Compare them with Fig. 12.6.
What do you observe? Bacteria and cyanobacteria are single-celled 
prokaryotes that are grouped under Monera (Fig. 12.6). Bacteria are found 
everywhere, including soil, water, air, hot springs and other extreme 
environments where most organisms cannot survive and they are present 
even inside the human bodies. They are also found in the gut of ruminants 
and are responsible for the production of biogas from the dung of these 
animals. Some bacteria are harmful (pathogens) and cause diseases 
but many are useful like Lactobacillus and Rhizobium. Cyanobacteria 
are autotrophs and decomposers. In addition to nutrient cycling, some 
bacteria also break down pollutants like oil, pesticides, sewage, and so on.
Bridging Science and Society
Ram Bux Singh is popularly known as the ‘Father of 
Modern Biogas’. He was a pioneering Indian scientist who 
contributed to the development of biogas technology. In 1957, 
he established India’s first scientifically designed biogas 
plant at Ramnagar, Sitapur, Uttar Pradesh, which marked 
the beginning of systematic modern biogas research in the 
country. He later worked extensively on developing low-cost, 
efficient biogas plants for rural areas. He also served as an international 
consultant and helped set up biogas plants in several countries. His 
lifelong efforts played a crucial role in promoting renewable energy, 
waste management and sustainable development through technology.
12.6.2 Kingdom Protista — Unicellular eukaryotes
All single-celled eukaryotes without cell wall or with cell wall made up of 
cellulose are grouped under the kingdom protista. They are microscopic 
and highly diverse organisms. You can study some of these protists 
(Fig. 12.7) by making a slide from hay infusion as explained below.
Activity 12.5: Let us make
To make a hay infusion, follow the steps given below —
1. Collect a small sample of grass after the lawn has been 
mowed, or collect straw or fodder.
2. Take a small glass bottle and fill one fourth of it with the 
grass, straw or fodder.
3. Fill the bottle with stagnant water or pond water and mix 
it with the collected plant material.
4. Cover the bottle with a muslin cloth and tie it using a thread.
5. Keep the bottle aside undisturbed for a week.
Fig. 12.6 Members of 
the Kingdom Monera
Amoeba Paramecium Euglena
Fig. 12.7: Microscopic illustration of 
common protists
Cyanobacteria 
(blue-green algae) 
were among the 
first organisms 
to produce 
oxygen through 
photosynthesis. 
About 2.5 billion 
years ago, oxygen 
accumulated in 
the atmosphere, 
made the Earth 
suitable for other 
forms of life. 
Fossils of ancient 
cyanobacteria 
are found in 
structures called 
stromatolites. 
They were found 
in Rajasthan and 
Madhya Pradesh. 
They provide some 
of the earliest 
evidence of life on 
the Earth.
Threads of 
Curiosity
Chapter-12.indd 235 28-04-2026 16:03:01
