236 Textbook of Science for Grade 9
6. Slightly open the mouth of the bottle by removing the muslin cloth, 
just enough to insert a dropper inside it and carefully take a drop 
of water.
7. Put the drop of water on a clean slide and observe it under a 
microscope.
Caution: The hay infusion may smell bad. Therefore, take 
precaution during lab exercises.
y Wear a lab coat, mask and hand gloves.
y Discard the hay infusion after autoclaving.
Do you notice moving organisms in the drop of water under the 
microscope? Can you identify them by comparing them with Fig. 12.7?
Protista includes single-celled eukaryotic organisms that live in 
water or moist places (Fig. 12.7). Some are autotrophic and others are 
heterotrophic. Protists are an important link in aquatic food chains, 
some produce oxygen while others serve as food for small animals. Some 
protists function as decomposers and help in nutrient cycling.
12.6.3 Kingdom Fungi — Multicellular, heterotrophic 
eukaryotes with a cell wall
Fungi are mostly multicellular eukaryotes with cell walls made of chitin. 
They do not make their own food. They either absorb nutrients from 
dead or decaying matter through fine filaments (which together form 
a network known as mycelium). Most of the fungi are saprophytes and 
therefore, they play a very important ecological role as decomposers, 
that means, they feed on dead organic matter, such as fallen leaves, twigs 
or dead organisms. They break down the complex organic matter into 
simpler substances and make them readily available in soil as minerals. 
Some of the fungi establish a mutualistic (symbiotic) relationship with 
other organisms while others live as parasites, and cause diseases in 
plants and animals. They reproduce both sexually and asexually, often 
by forming spores, and grow best in warm and moist conditions.
Yeast (Fig. 12.8a) and Aspergillus mould are common fungi. However, 
yeast is a unicellular organism, since its cell wall is made up of chitin, 
it has been put under fungi. Mushrooms (Fig. 12.8c) are macroscopic 
fungi that reproduce by spores. Some fungi like Aspergillus (Fig. 12.8b) 
and Penicillium are used to make enzymes and antibiotics. Fungi are 
important decomposers and help recycle nutrients. Without them, the 
decay of dead plants and animals would be greatly reduced, adversely 
affecting the soil fertility and ecological balance.
Wild edible mushrooms are a valuable dietary food with high nutritional and medicinal values. 
They are important forest resources used and conserved by many communities, including tribal 
communities in India. These communities possess traditional knowledge about the edible and 
poisonous mushrooms based on folk taxonomy. Some wild mushrooms are used as sources of 
food and some as medicine for treating various ailments. Nowadays, mushroom cultivation is 
becoming a promising vocation for livelihood. Mushroom farming is easy and accessible due to its 
minimal space requirement, low investment and fast life cycle (30 – 45 days).
Bridging Science and Society
(c) Mushrooms
Fig. 12.8: Common fungi
Aspergillus
(a) Yeast
2. How can a 
single-celled 
organism carry 
out all its life 
processes when 
billions of cells 
are required to 
perform similar 
functions in 
multicellular 
organisms like 
us?
Pause and 
Ponder
Chapter-12.indd 236 04-05-2026 14:40:59
