237 Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
12.6.4 Kingdom Plantae — Multicellular, autotrophic 
eukaryotes with a cell wall
Plants are multicellular, autotrophic organisms that perform photosynthesis. 
Their cells have a rigid cell wall primarily made up of cellulose, which 
provides support and protection. All plants belong to the kingdom Plantae. 
Plants form the base of most of the food chains and release oxygen which 
is essential for life on the Earth. Kingdom Plantae is further divided into 
five classes.
Class
Plantae
Thallophyta Bryophyta Pteridophyta Gymnosperm Angiosperm
Thallophyta (algae) — Primitive plants
Thallophytes (thallos means undifferentiated body and phyton means 
plant) are among the simplest plant forms and are mostly found in water or 
moist environments. They form a thallus, a simple body that allows direct 
exchange of gases, nutrients and water with the surroundings. They are 
well-adapted to aquatic habitats. An example of Thallophyta is Spirogyra
(Fig. 12.9).
Bridging Science and Society
Have you ever seen white-green patches on the tree trunk, damp walls or 
stones? What do you think about these patches? Visit a village and talk to 
an elderly person about these patches. They recognise these patches as an 
indicator of a pollution-free environment. In fact, the lichens change their 
colour with air pollutants. Based on their colour, researchers can find out the 
concentration of pollutants in the air. Therefore, they are natural bioindicators 
for the measurement of air quality. Villagers also collect these as forest produce 
for utilisation in their daily life. Some types of lichen, commonly called patthar 
ke phool are used as a spice, while some are used as medicines, and also for 
making dyes since ancient times to give maroon, violet, or burgundy colour to 
woollen and silk fabrics. Biologically, these are symbiotic (mutual associations 
of two organisms) — one partner is an autotrophic alga and the other one is a 
heterotrophic fungus. Fungal partners provide protection, and algal partners 
photosynthesise and provide food. Some lichens are poisonous, so it is important 
to classify and identify them properly for safe and proper utilisation.
Bryophyta — First steps on land, still need water
Bryophytes (bryon means moss and phyton means plant), such as mosses and 
liverworts (Fig. 12.10), which represents an important shift from water to 
land. You might have seen them as large green mats on damp rocks or even 
on the walls of some old buildings, or even on soil surfaces as green mats. 
Bryophytes have a more differentiated body as compared to thallophytes. 
They have root-like structures called rhizoids, and may possess stem-like 
and leaf-like simple structures. Bryophytes survive in moist and shady 
places, growing as green mats on the soil, especially during the monsoons. 
Examples of Bryophytes include Marchantia and moss (Fig. 12.10).
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 10
Fig. 12.9: Spirogyra
Fig. 12.10: Members 
of class Bryophyta 
(a) Marchantia
(b) Moss
Chapter-12.indd 237 04-04-2026 16:20:43
