238 Textbook of Science for Grade 9
Activity 12.6: Let us explore
1. Observe some bryophytes with the help of a hand lens. Collect 
them in a watch glass. 
2. Put a drop of water on it and observe it under a dissecting 
microscope. A dissecting microscope enables us to view 
magnified images of live specimens.
How do they differ from the leaves that you usually observe in 
plants in your surroundings?
Bryophytes require water for reproduction. Therefore, they 
are called the ‘amphibians’ of the plant kingdom. They show how 
plants began to colonise land, while remaining dependent on 
moisture.
Pteridophyta — Adaptation to land and having structural 
transport system
Look at Fig. 12.11a. What changes do you observe in the 
plant structure as compared to thallophytes and bryophytes? 
Pteridophytes (pteris derived from pteron means feather and 
phyton means plant), such as ferns, possess true roots, stems and 
leaves. How do you think that the transport of water and food 
takes place in all parts of these plants? One possible explanation 
is that ferns have specialised transport tissue. How can you test 
this explanation? A cross section of the stem of a fern can be cut 
and seen under a microscope. You may also observe a permanent 
slide of a cross section of a fern stem available in your school 
laboratory. The cross section shows vascular tissues, xylem and 
phloem, which transport water and food, respectively, throughout 
the plant (Fig. 12.11b). Pteridophytes require aquatic conditions 
for reproduction and do not produce seeds.
Activity 12.7: Let us compare
1. Recall the cross section of the sunflower stem you have 
studied in Chapter 3 (Fig. 3.7).
2. Compare the cross section of the stem of a fern, a pteridophytic 
plant (Fig. 12.11) with a cross section of sunflower stem you 
studied in Chapter 3 (Fig. 3.7). 
3. What difference do you observe in the vascular tissue of 
the fern stem and of the stem of higher plants? Write your 
observations. Share and discuss them in class.
Gymnosperms — Reproduction without water
Gymnosperms (gymnos means naked and spermos means seed), 
such as pines (Fig. 12.12) and cycads are well-adapted to cold and 
dry regions. Their needle-like or scale-like leaves reduce water loss 
and withstand harsh conditions. They produce seeds, which protect 
the developing embryo and contain stored food. Gymnosperms do 
not require aquatic conditions for fertilisation. Their seeds are not 
enclosed in fruits and are often exposed on cones.
Fig. 12.11: (a) Fern, and (b) cross 
section of a fern stem
Xylem
Phloem
(a)
(b)
Fig. 12.12: Cone of pine
3. Which plant 
features reduce their 
dependence on water 
but still require moist 
conditions?
4. Why do taller plants 
need specialised 
transport tissues?
5. How do seeds and 
fruits affect, where 
and how plants can 
survive?
Pause and 
Ponder
Chapter-12.indd 238 28-04-2026 16:04:31
