241 Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
feeding habits, and enhanced control and coordination, while also 
introducing exceptions and new challenges.
Porifera (pore-bearers) — Multicellularity without tissues
Sponges (Fig. 12.16a) represent one of the simplest animal body plans. 
They are multicellular but lack organisation of tissues and organs. 
Numerous pores in their body allow water to continuously flow 
through it, bringing food particles and oxygen directly to individual 
cells, carrying the waste away. Sponges remain fixed in one place and 
are found in aquatic environments. Do you think they would be able to 
survive on land? Why or why not?
Cnidaria — True tissues and active feeding
Cnidarians, such as Hydra (Fig. 12.14), jellyfish (Fig. 12.16b) and corals show 
a major change in body organisation. Tissue-level organisation is present in 
them which allows specialised cells to perform specific functions, such as 
tentacles, which are used for capturing prey. Unlike poriferans, cnidarians 
can catch their prey using tentacles instead of depending on water currents 
to bring food particles inside through pores. However, cnidarians possess a 
single opening that functions for both food intake and waste removal. Can 
you hypothesise what limitations this body structure might have?
Platyhelminthes (flatworms) — Bilateral symmetry and 
directional movement
Flatworms show organisational advancement through bilateral symmetry 
(organism’s body can be divided into two halves along one plane), in 
which the body has distinct head-tail and front-back regions. This body 
organisation allows better coordination of movement and this is the 
beginning of directional activity. Their flattened bodies permit efficient 
diffusion of gases without specialised respiratory organs but there is still a 
single opening for food intake and waste elimination.
Many flatworms have adopted a parasitic lifestyle. Hooks and suckers 
are present in the parasitic forms which helps them to attach firmly to the 
host tissues for obtaining nutrients (Fig. 12.16c).
Some infectious diseases are caused by parasitic worms. They enter our bodies through 
contaminated water and food. They live inside our body, especially in the alimentary 
canal (the digestive system). These worms take nutrients from our body and live like 
parasites (the organism that lives in or on another organism is called the host). For this 
reason, it is suggested to wash your hands properly, maintain personal hygiene and good 
sanitary habits, consume properly cooked food and boiled or filtered drinking water.
Bridging Science and Society
Nematoda (roundworms) — Efficient body design with two 
openings
Roundworms have elongated, cylindrical bodies (Fig. 12.16d). This body 
structure allows their efficient movement through soil, water, or host 
tissues. This body form increases the range of environment in which 
Research studies 
show that one 
kilogram of sponge 
can filter up to 
24,000 litres of sea 
water per day.
Threads of 
Curiosity
Fig. 12.14: 
Longitudinal section of 
hydra showing tissue 
level organisation
Opening
Chapter-12.indd 241 04-04-2026 17:16:48
