242 Textbook of Science for Grade 9
roundworms can survive, despite relatively simple internal organisation. 
The body has two openings (mouth and anus). The organ system level of 
body organisation is distinct in male and female worms.
Annelida (segmented worms) — segmentation and body cavities
Annelids, such as earthworms (Fig. 12.16e), represent a notable development 
in body organisation. Their bodies are cylindrical and are divided into 
segments. What advantages segmentation might offer to an organism? 
Observing how an earthworm moves may help you form a hypothesis. 
They possess organ system level of organisation. Presence of muscles help 
them in locomotion, and nerve cord helps in control and coordination.
Segmentation allows greater flexibility and more precise control of 
movements. A body cavity is also present in them as shown in Fig. 12.15.
Arthropoda — Jointed appendages and an external skeleton
Arthropods (arthro means limbs and poda means appendages) includes 
insects, crabs (Fig. 12.16f) and spiders. They have segmented bodies with 
different segments specialised for different functions. A defining structural 
feature of arthropods is the development of a hard external skeleton (rigid 
external covering). What advantages can the outer covering provide?
This outer covering provides protection, reduces water loss and 
supports powerful muscles, allowing arthropods to survive in dry and 
exposed environments.
6. An earthworm (annelida) and a beetle (arthropoda), both have segmented 
bodies but the beetle has a hard external skeleton. How does the beetle’s 
external skeleton help it survive? 
Pause and Ponder
Image
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h)
Porifera Cnidaria Platyhelminthes Nematoda Annelida Arthropoda Mollusca Echinodermata
Habitat Water (Marine) Water 
(Fresh and marine) Water/inside host Soil/water/inside 
host Moist soil/water Land/water Water/moist land Marine water
Level of 
organisation Cellular Tissue Organ Organ system 
(digestive system) Organ system Organ system Organ system Organ system
Skeleton X X X X X Exoskeleton Exoskeleton Endoskeleton
Fig. 12.16: The animal kingdom
Body 
cavity
Fig. 12.15: Internal 
structure of an 
earthworm: Organ 
formation and body 
cavity
Chapter-12.indd 242 04-04-2026 16:21:46
