244 Textbook of Science for Grade 9
Vertebrates — Animals with a backbone
Vertebrates possess a vertebral column (backbone), an internal skeletal 
structure that supports the body and protects vital organs, such as the 
brain and the spinal cord. This internal framework allows a larger body 
size, efficient movement and the development of complex organ systems. 
Vertebrates show advanced sensory abilities and coordinated behaviour. 
Vertebrates are classified into five groups, namely fish, amphibians, 
reptiles, birds and mammals based on the broad patterns of their habitat 
use, body covering and reproduction. 
How do forests with rich and highly diverse flora and fauna work as a barrier and reduce the 
impact of disasters?
Forests with rich biodiversity play a vital role to create physical, biological and chemical 
barriers to protect against challenges. Some of the examples are as follows:
y Large diversity of trees in mangrove forests helped during the super cyclone that hit 
Orissa in 1999. Villages with more mangroves experienced less destruction.
y Rich biodiversity generally correlates with lower tick-borne disease risk. In the Western 
Ghats of India, where forest diversity acts as a biological barrier against Monkey Fever 
(Kyasanur Forest Disease, KFD), as many animals are the hosts where the virus cannot 
replicate inside their bodies. 
y Diverse microorganisms in forest soils and plant roots absorb, transform, or break down 
pollutants. This improves water quality and protects ecosystems. Mangrove soils trap 
sediments and heavy metals, preventing pollution from spreading into oceans and rivers.
Bridging Science and Society
12.7 Adaptations as Outcomes of Structural Change
The diversity seen in animals today are outcomes of changes in the body 
structure over long periods of time. Fins and gills allow fish to move and 
breathe in water. Feathers and hollow bones make flight possible in birds. 
Fat storage in camels and thick fur in polar bears illustrate how structural 
features support survival under extreme conditions. In mammals, 
mammary glands represent an additional structural and functional 
change that improves the survival of young ones. These features are 
interconnected and reflect how different vertebrates tackle the challenges 
of survival in different environments. All these characteristics show that 
animal diversity reflects a wide range of body forms found in organisms 
living under different environmental conditions.
12.7.1 The hierarchical nature of classification
Observe and analyse Fig. 12.17. What do you infer? Classification follows a 
step-by-step order, starting from very broad groups, and moving towards 
smaller and more specific ones. At each lower level, organisms share more 
common features. Every lower group is a part of the group above it.
Kingdom Phylum Class Order Family Genus Species
This arrangement works like an address. Just as a house address helps 
us locate a place exactly, classification helps scientists identify, compare 
and study organisms accurately, and understand how they are related.
Chapter-12.indd 244 03-Apr-26 8:14:46 PM
