246 Textbook of Science for Grade 9
Table 12.3: Scientific names of organisms in the binomial 
system of nomenclature
S. No. Common name Scientific Name
1. Tiger Panthera tigris
2. Mango Mangifera indica
The first word, Panthera or Mangifera, is the name of the genus 
and the second, tigris or indica, is the name of the species. A genus 
groups closely related species that share common features, in this 
case, Panthera tigris (tiger) and Panthera leo (lion) under the genus 
Panthera — the roaring cats (possessing the ability to roar), have 
similar skull structure, and so on. The species name indicates a 
group of organisms that consists of similar individuals capable of 
interbreeding and producing offsprings. Together, the genus and 
species name form a unique scientific name used worldwide.
Fig. 12.18: Example 
illustrating a scientific name
Rules for writing the scientific names
1. The name has two parts — genus and species.
2. The genus name begins with a capital letter and comes first, followed 
by the species name, which is written in small letters (lower case).
3. The scientific name is written in italics when printed, or underlined 
when handwritten (Fig. 12.18).
The five kingdom classification offered a more comprehensive 
way to group organisms compared to the previous systems, 
but it still could not fully explain the diversity of life. 
Latest advances in genetic research aided in modifying this 
classification. With advances in microscopes and genetic 
studies, scientists began to compare organisms at 
the DNA level. As you have studied in Chapter 2, 
every living cell contains genetic material (DNA), 
which carries the instructions for its growth and function. 
Organisms with similar DNA are considered to have a common ancestry. Based 
on the genetic data, Carl Woese (1977) proposed the three domain system 
(Fig. 12.19) —
y Bacteria
y Archaea
y Eukarya
This system showed that microscopic life forms are far more diverse than 
previously believed.
Ready to Go Beyond
Fig. 12.19: Three 
domains of life
Eukarya
Archaea
Bacteria
Next
Level
Up
Chapter-12.indd 246 03-Apr-26 8:14:54 PM
