247 Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
Threads of Curiosity
Why do classification systems keep changing? Does that 
indicate how science works? Yes, science evolves and 
progresses as we learn new things. For example, Aristotle’s 
system worked for his time, but with new tools (like 
microscopes) and technological advancements (like staining 
techniques), scientists discovered microorganisms. These 
discoveries helped us understand the natural world better. 
Accordingly, the biological classification changed. The 
biological classification (and science) thus, is an ongoing 
process of reasoning and change. 
12.9 Fossils as Evidence
When we talk of diversity changing over time, what 
evidence do we have? Fossils are preserved remains of 
plants and animals found in layers of rocks, sand and 
mud. Generally, older layers contain simpler organisms, 
while newer layers show more complex forms. From 
giant dinosaurs to early humans and ancient plants, some 
important fossils have been discovered in India. Fossils act 
as natural records that help us understand how life has 
changed over millions of years. 
12.10 Biodiversity Under Threat
Each species, large or small, plays an important role in 
nature. Plants produce food and oxygen, animals pollinate 
flowers and disperse seeds, and microorganisms recycle 
nutrients. Human activities, such as pollution, deforestation, 
the overuse of resources and climate change are reducing 
biodiversity. When one species disappears, others that 
depend on it may also decline in number and eventually 
also, disappear.
Threads of Curiosity
When scientists discover a new organism, they compare it with 
the already known species. Sometimes, the species name reflects 
their place of discovery, or honours a scientist. The Purple Frog 
(Nasikabatrachus sahyadrensis) from Kerala has a species name 
after the Sahyadri Hills (Fig. 12.20).
The Purple Frog lives underground for most of the year and 
comes out only during the monsoon to breed. It belongs to an 
ancient family of frogs as understood from fossils. Its discovery 
in 2003 helped scientists understand ancient amphibian groups 
and highlighted the need for biodiversity conservation in the 
Western Ghats.
Fig. 12.20: A purple frog resting on 
wet soil
Birbal Sahni 
was an eminent 
scientist who 
studied fossil 
plants. He 
founded the Birbal Sahni 
Institute of Palaeosciences 
(BSIP) in Lucknow, which 
continues his work on ancient 
plants and past environments 
even to this day. His studies 
helped link present-day plants 
with their ancestors and 
showed that life on the Earth 
has a long, connected history. 
His work continues to inspire 
young scientists to explore 
how fossils reveal the story of 
our planet.
Meet a Scientist
Pause and Ponder
 7. Does the term ‘biodiversity’ 
relate only to the variety 
of organisms, or does it 
encompass other elements? 
 8. If you find a new organism
in a pond, what features will 
you observe to classify it and 
why?
 9. Why do genetic studies 
provide deep information 
about living beings?
10. How can changes 
in climate affect the 
biodiversity?
Chapter-12.indd 247 03-Apr-26 8:14:56 PM
