248 Textbook of Science for Grade 9
Floating grasslands, locally known as phumdis are classified as one of the unique 
habitats in the world. It is located in the Loktak lake of the Keibul Lamjo National 
Park, in Manipur, India. These floating beds of soil have a variety of rooted 
vegetation growing with rich organic matter in it. Its thickness varies from a 
few centimetres to two metres. The habitat supports an association of unique 
vegetation and is home to an endangered variety of Sangai, the dancing deer, 
endemic to Manipur. The deer spends considerable time on phumdis restricted 
to this small area. This deer species was declared extinct in 1951. In 1953 the deer 
species was rediscovered, with the efforts of naturalists based on their unique 
characteristics of having hooves and elongated patterns. These characteristics 
of the deer species helped in 
their identification. Recently, 
the phumdis are degenerating 
and the Sangai deer is listed in 
the IUCN Red Data list. Habitat 
loss will significantly affect the 
Sangai population. Efforts for 
the conservation of phumdis
and the Sangai deer are 
currently in progress. Provide 
your suggestions to save habitat 
and the Sangai deer.
Bridging Science and Society
At a Glance
y Life on the Earth exists in many forms, from simple bacteria to 
complex animals. 
y Scientists classify organisms based on the cell structure, number of 
cells, mode of nutrition and the organism’s ecological role.
y Whittaker’s five kingdom classification system — Monera, Protista, 
Fungi, Plantae and Animalia — is a simple and useful system to 
understand diversity.
y Kingdom Plantae is further divided into five classes — Thallophyta, 
Bryophyta, Pteridophyta, Gymnosperm and Angiosperm.
y Kingdom Animalia is divided into non-chordata (invertebrates) 
and chordata (vertebrates) on the basis of formation of notochord. 
Non-chordata (Invertebrates) has been divided into phyla — Porifera, 
Cnidaria, Platyhelminthes, Nematoda, Annelida, Arthropoda, 
Mollusca, Echinodermata.
y Protochordates show a transition from invertebrates to vertebrates 
as they possess notochord atleast once in their life. Vertebrates are 
further divided into groups — fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and 
mammals.
y Classification is not just about naming organisms. It helps us 
understand the relationships among organisms, trace the history of 
life on the Earth and conserve the biodiversity.
Chapter-12.indd 248 03-Apr-26 8:15:01 PM
