154Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Excerpts from historical accounts like Faxian’s are valuable 
sources, but they reflect only the writer’s perspective and focus 
at one point in time and for a limited portion of the society 
they describe. Let us not, however, forget that elsewhere in his 
travelogue, Faxian also describes the harsh treatment of the 
chanḍālas, who were regarded as outcastes and lived outside 
the city limits.
Just as you may have perceived the excerpt from Faxian’s 
travelogue differently from your friends, a group of historians 
may examine the same source and draw varied interpretations 
from it. Historians then look at more sources to corroborate their 
understanding. This reminds us of the need to assess multiple 
sources, perspectives and interpretations before drawing 
conclusions. 
Glimpses of the Gupta Empire
Governance and administration
Let us observe the map in Fig. 7.8. You will notice that many 
kingdoms coexisted during the same period. Some of them may 
have been at war with each other in their ambition to expand 
their control. Recall what we saw earlier about Kauṭilya’s ideas 
on ruling a kingdom. He advised rulers to form alliances (mitra)
as one of the components of the saptānga. 
New kings … new titles
Inscriptions and coins provide valuable insights into the 
titles adopted by Gupta rulers, such as ‘mahārājadhirāja’, 
‘samrāṭ’, and ‘chakravartin’. These titles reflected their claim 
to supreme authority and emphasised their superiority 
over earlier rulers who used simpler titles like ‘rājan’ and 
‘mahārāja’.
The Gupta rulers used various strategies, including military 
conquests, diplomacy, and alliances, to expand and consolidate 
their vast empire. The last method included matrimonial 
alliances. A well-known example is that of Prabhāvatī Gupta, 
Outcastes:
Someone 
who has 
been 
rejected 
from a social 
or cultural 
group; in 
this case, 
a category 
of people 
considered 
socially 
too low to 
be part of 
the varṇa 
system.
Chapter 7.indd 154 08-04-2025 11:41:41
Reprint 2026-27
