156Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
The Gupta Empire had a well-organised system of administration. 
Instead of controlling everything from a central authority, they 
divided the empire into provinces and granted land to local 
rulers, priests and chieftains. These land grants were carefully 
inscribed on copper plates to keep accurate records — many of 
which have been discovered by archaeologists in recent times. 
This system helped ensure proper tax collection and allowed the 
Gupta rulers to govern efficiently while still giving local leaders 
some control over their regions. 
Thriving trade
The primary source of revenue of the Gupta’s was land tax. 
Other sources included fines, taxes on mines, irrigation, trade and 
crafts. This revenue was used for administration, maintaining 
the army, building temples and infrastructure, and supporting 
scholars and artists.
As we see once again, for such an empire to sustain itself, it had 
to promote a vibrant internal and external trade. In the Gupta 
era, India traded with the Mediterranean world, Southeast Asia 
and China, exporting textiles, spices, ivory and gemstones. The 
Indian Ocean trade network connected Indian ports to distant 
markets. One significant stop on the way to the Mediterranean 
markets was Socotra Island, strategically located in the Arabian 
Sea. Archaeological evidence, such as pottery, inscriptions in 
the Brahmi script, and designs such as a Buddhist stūpa, has 
established the presence of Indian traders there over several 
centuries, apart from traders from Egypt, Arabia, Rome and 
Greece. This small island carries evidence of the rich cultural 
exchanges that trade promoted in the Indian Ocean.
New Ideas and Wonders: The Classical Age 
As we saw, Gupta rulers were devout followers of Viṣhṇu; this 
is often reflected in their coins and inscriptions. However, 
they also supported other traditions and schools of thought. 
They patronised Buddhist institutions, including the renowned 
Nālandā university and several other Buddhist vihāras 
(monastery). Their approach was inclusive and open. We will 
explore these institutions further in higher grades.
Chapter 7.indd 156 08-04-2025 11:41:42
Reprint 2026-27
