161Tapestry of the Past 7 – The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity
The Decline of the Guptas
By the 6th century CE, the Gupta Empire began showing signs 
of decline as the later rulers faced challenges from external 
invasions. The fierce Hūṇa tribe from central Asia repeatedly 
attacked the empire, weakening its control over north India. At 
the same time, the rise of powerful regional rulers led to internal 
conflicts. However, was this truly the end, or the beginning of a 
period that marked a turning point in Indian history? We will 
explore this question in the next part of this book. 
Meanwhile in the South and Northeast ... 
Let us go back to the map in Fig. 7.8. While the Guptas ruled in 
the north, the Pallavas emerged as a powerful dynasty in the 
south, gradually consolidating their power in parts of present￾day Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. 
Their origins are not clearly known, but they appear to have 
been a tributary power under the Sātavāhanas, whom we 
encountered in the previous chapter, and to have gained power 
as the Sātavāhanas declined.
The Pallavas were also great patrons of art and architecture. Most 
of them were devotees of Śhiva and are credited with constructing 
magnificent temples and rock-cut caves, some of which we will 
visit when we explore classical Indian architecture. The capital 
of the Pallavas, Kānchipuram (in present-day Tamil Nadu), often 
known as the ‘city of a thousand temples’, developed as one of 
the major centres of learning in the south. The establishment of 
ghaṭikās — centres of learning that emerged during the reign of 
the Sātavāhanas — fostered an environment for education and 
intellectual growth. 
In the northeastern region, the Kāmarūpa kingdom, ruled by 
the Varman dynasty, extended over the Brahmaputra valley 
(broadly, present-day Assam) and northern parts of present-day 
Bengal and Bangladesh. An ancient name for the Brahmaputra 
valley of Assam is Prāgjyotiṣha, mentioned in the Rāmāyaṇa 
and Mahābhārata; the latter text mentions Bhagadatta, king of 
Chapter 7.indd 161 08-04-2025 11:41:45
Reprint 2026-27
