2Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 2
India’s Agricultural Landscape
Farming or agriculture is one of the oldest occupations of 
humankind. It encompasses the preparation of soil, cultivation 
of plants, rearing of livestock, and, in many cases, the growing 
of trees as part of a comprehensive farming system. In some 
areas, farmers also practice pisciculture (fish rearing) or 
rear cocoons to extract silk thread. Very broadly, the term 
‘agriculture’ encompasses farming, animal husbandry (raising 
livestock), forestry, and horticulture.
 DON’T MISS OUT
The word agriculture comes from Latin. Agri means field and 
culture means to cultivate. The Government of India classifies 
economic activities related to agriculture as ‘agriculture and 
allied activities’. Broadly, this includes agriculture, livestock￾related activities, beekeeping (apiculture), fisheries, rearing 
of silkworms and preparing silk yarn, and fibre production, 
such as cotton and hemp.
A little over 18 per cent of the country’s total value of goods and 
services produced in a year (gross domestic product) comes from 
agriculture and allied activities (2022-2023). Approximately 46 
per cent of India’s working population is engaged in agriculture 
and allied activities for their livelihood (2022-2023). A large 
proportion of families in India are closely connected to the land 
in one way or another, and in many cases, have been cultivating 
it for generations. Farming activities are, of course, essential 
for nurturing and sustaining the human population.
THINK ABOUT IT
When you read or hear the word ‘farmer’, what do you 
visualise? Many people imagine a man. However, in rural 
areas of India, more than 75 per cent of people working in 
the agriculture sector are women (2025). They perform most 
of the farming operations, from sowing to harvesting and 
threshing.
Threshing:
Removing 
the edible 
grain from 
the straw 
or husk, 
manually 
or using a 
machine 
Chapter 1.indd 2 11/27/2025 12:11:27 PM
Reprint 2026-27
