3India and the World: Land and the People
1 – The Story of Indian Farming
India’s agricultural landscape is a vibrant blend of traditional 
and modern farming practices, with diverse crops and deep￾rooted cultural traditions. From the golden wheat fields of 
Punjab, the saffron valley of Kashmir, the lush tea gardens of the 
Northeast or the Nilgiris to the emerald paddy fields of Kerala, 
agriculture has long been a fundamental part of the nation’s 
identity.
LET’S EXPLORE
Create a list of the foods you typically eat. Identify the grains, 
pulses, oils, vegetables, and fruits in them. Now locate where 
you live on a physical map of India. (You may refer to the 
political map of India at the end of the book if you wish.) Which 
of the food items do you think grow in and around where you 
live? What do you think are the reasons that they are cultivated 
in your region? Which of them comes from other places? Why 
do you think they are not grown in your area?
You may have reasoned that growing crops is dependent on 
several factors — the soil, the climate, the availability of water, 
the terrain, and so on. The story of farming is, therefore, linked 
to these factors. We will look at some of these factors in this 
chapter. But before that, we need to go back a little in time…
Echoes from the Past
The story of Indian farming goes back to prehistory. 
Archaeological investigations have shown the presence of rice 
grains in the Ganga Plain as early as the 7th or 8th millennium 
BCE. Some experts have, however, pointed out that this need 
not mean that rice cultivation was already systematic; that may 
have taken a few more millennia to be mastered. At Mehrgarh 
(in Baluchistan, a site antecedent of the Sindhu-Sarasvatī 
civilisation), the cultivation of barley and millets is also dated to 
the 7th millennium BCE. Later, barley and wheat were the staple 
crops of the Harappans; several Harappan sites also point to 
the presence of rice in the 3rd millennium BCE, at least in some 
regions, apart from millets and several vegetables.
Chapter 1.indd 3 11/27/2025 12:11:27 PM
Reprint 2026-27
