25India and the World: Land and the People 1 – The Story of Indian Farming
The promotion of cold storages, and better access to information 
and markets through the use of digital technology, enable 
farmers to get better prices for their produce. (Refer to the 
chapter ‘Understanding Markets’ in Part 1 of this textbook.)
LET’S EXPLORE
Listen to the special programmes for farmers on the radio 
or watch a programme on television for a few days. Write 
down carefully the information that is shared through 
these mediums. Make a short report on the categories of 
information you gathered as well as questions that came to 
your mind during this activity.
Challenges
Indian farmers face several challenges. One of them has been 
the decreasing size of landholding as land gets divided among 
family members over generations. The average landholding is 
approximately three-fourths of a hectare; this is about the size 
of an average football field. 
Farmers with small landholdings are not able to earn much 
income. It is also difficult for farmers to use tractors and other 
machines on their farms — the machines are designed for 
larger farms and are expensive to buy or rent, although of late 
machines have been designed and invented for small farms too. 
Traditionally, families in farming have different sources of 
income beyond the crops they grow. They rear cows, goats, 
poultry, practise apiculture or fishing, and so on. Where 
possible, they collect forest produce. Many grow trees on 
the bunds for fruit and timber. Diversity builds resilience. 
However, today this is proving to be inadequate to provide a 
decent quality of life to farmers. 
Farmers also face one of the biggest challenges of our time, 
climate change. With increasing unpredictability of weather 
patterns (for instance, untimely rains), and more frequent 
extreme events (such as severe droughts or heavy rainfall), 
Hectare:
1 hectare 
= 10,000 
square 
metres. (The 
old unit of an 
acre, about 
4047 square 
metres, is 
still widely in 
use in India.)
Landholding:
An area of land 
that a person 
owns
Chapter 1.indd 25 11/27/2025 12:11:46 PM
Reprint 2026-27
