68
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
On pushing, the object stops after sliding a certain 
distance. This must be due to a force acting between the 
surfaces of the sliding object and the table or floor which 
are in contact. This force must be acting on the object in a 
direction opposite to its direction of motion. This force is 
what brings the object to a stop. 
The force that comes into play when an object moves 
or tries to move over another surface is called the force 
of friction or simply friction. Friction always acts in a 
direction opposite to the direction in which the object is 
moving or trying to move. The force of friction is a contact 
force since it arises due to two surfaces in contact.
Friction arises due to the irregularities in the two surfaces in 
contact. Even surfaces which appear smooth, have a large number 
of minute irregularities (Fig. 5.6). When placed in contact, the 
irregularities of two surfaces lock into each other and oppose 
any effort to move one surface over the other.
Fig. 5.6: Friction between two surfaces due to irregularities
Fig. 5.5: Friction acts between 
two surfaces and opposes the 
motion of the object.
Activity 5.4: Let us explore
z Try Activity 5.3 again, but this time place the same object on 
different surfaces, such as glass, cloth, wood, ceramic tile, 
and sand. 
z Does the object stop after travelling the same distance as in 
Activity 5.3?
z Does the object stop at the same distance on all surfaces?
For different surfaces, the object stops after moving different 
distances so we can say that the force of friction depends upon 
the nature of the surfaces in contact. Friction is greater on rough 
surfaces.
A step further
Does the force of friction act only if the objects are moving on solid 
surfaces? What about objects moving through liquids and gases? Air, 
water, and other liquids also exert force of friction on the objects 
moving through them. Hence the objects, such as aeroplanes, ships, 
boats, and high-speed trains are designed with specific shapes to 
reduce the force of friction due to the air or water around them.
Does this mean that
the force of friction
will be greater if the
surfaces are rough?
Chapter 5.indd 68 10-Sep-25 4:22:40 PM
Reprint 2026-27
