70
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Electrostatic force
Activity 5.6: Let us experiment
z Take a plastic scale or a plastic straw, a piece of 
polythene, and small pieces of paper.
z Rub plastic scale/straw vigorously with polythene.
z Do not touch the rubbed part with your hand or 
any metal object.
z Now, bring it close to the small pieces of paper placed 
on a table, taking care not to touch the paper pieces 
(Fig. 5.8). Do you notice something surprising?
The paper pieces get pulled towards the plastic scale/straw 
and stick to it when it is brought close to paper pieces. Why does 
this happen?
When two objects of certain materials are rubbed together, 
electrical charges build up on their surfaces. These charges are 
called static charges as they do not move by themselves. The 
object that acquires static charges is said to be a charged object. A 
charged object attracts, that is, exerts a force on uncharged objects 
made of certain materials, such as small pieces of paper. This force 
comes into play even when the objects are not in contact.
Let us do another activity with objects made of different 
materials.
Activity 5.7: Let us experiment
z Take two balloons, a length of thread, and a woollen 
cloth.
z Inflate two balloons and hang them in such a way that 
they do not touch each other as shown in Fig. 5.9a. 
z Rub both balloons with the woollen cloth and release 
them. Be careful not to touch the rubbed balloons 
with your fingers. What do you observe?
We observe that the balloons move away from each 
other as if they are repelling each other (Fig. 5.9b).
z Now bring the woollen cloth used for rubbing 
the balloons close to one of the rubbed balloons.
What happens?
They move towards each other as if they are attracting 
each other. What do we infer from these observations?
Fig. 5.8: Charged plastic scale 
attracting small paper pieces
Fig. 5.9: (a) Two uncharged 
balloons; (b) Two charged 
balloons repelling each other
(a)
(b)
Chapter 5.indd 70 12-Sep-25 2:15:31 PM
Reprint 2026-27
