Chapter 5 — Exploring Forces 73
Let us now try to find out if the Earth pulls every object with 
equal force.
Activity 5.9: Let us explore
z Take a spring and a few objects of different masses, 
such as a pencil box, a tiffin box, and a small stone.
z Hang one end of the spring from a nail (Fig. 5.12a). 
From the other end, hang an object and observe the 
spring (Fig. 5.12b). Does the spring stretch? 
z Now hang the other objects, one by one and notice the 
stretch in the spring each time. Is the stretch caused by 
each object the same?
When an object is hung from a spring, the spring 
stretches due to the force applied on the object by the Earth. 
We find that the stretch caused in the spring is different 
for different objects. This indicates that the Earth pulls 
different objects with different forces, that is, the weight 
of different objects is different. Can we use the spring to 
measure the weight of an object?
A step further
A spring balance is a simple device used to measure weight (force).
It consists of a spring fixed at one end, with a hook attached at 
the other end. When we hang an object from the hook, the spring 
stretches, and the amount of stretching gives the weight of the object. 
There is a scale on the balance which is marked to show the weight 
(force) in newton. Usually, there is also another scale to show the 
corresponding values of mass in gram (g). These values have been 
marked with the assumption that the spring balance is used on the 
Earth, with the Earth’s gravitational force attracting the object.
(b)
Fig. 5.12: (a) A hanging spring; 
(b) Two different objects hung 
from the spring
(a)
Let us learn to measure the weight using a spring balance. But 
first, let us familiarise ourselves with a spring balance the way 
we did with thermometer earlier (in the chapter ‘Temperature 
and Its Measurement’ in Curiosity, Grade 6).
Activity 5.10: Let us observe
z Look at the spring balance shown in Fig. 5.13 carefully. What 
is the maximum weight it can measure? 
The maximum weight it can measure is 10 N. Thus, this scale 
has a range of 0 to 10 N.
Chapter 5.indd 73 10-Sep-25 4:51:23 PM
Reprint 2026-27
