Chapter 5 — Exploring Forces 75
You can repeat Activities 5.10 to 5.12 for the mass scale shown 
on the left side on the spring balance (Fig. 5.13) to measure the 
mass of an object.
A step further
The mass of an object can be measured indirectly by measuring its 
weight (using a spring balance) or by comparing its weight with the 
weight of an object of a known mass (using a beam balance). Since 
the weight of an object remains almost the same everywhere on the 
Earth, so for all practical purposes it is acceptable to weigh an object 
to find its mass.
As we have learnt earlier (in the chapter ‘Materials 
Around Us’ in Curiosity, Grade 6), mass is the amount 
of matter in an object and is measured in grams (g) 
or kilograms (kg). Its value remains the same at every 
place. Weight, on the other hand, is the gravitational force 
with which the Earth (or another planet) pulls an object. Since 
gravitational force can vary very slightly from place to place on 
the Earth (and can be very different on different planets), weight 
can change, but mass does not.
What is the difference 
between weight and 
mass?
A step further
The following table illustrates that although the mass of an object 
remains the same, its weight is different on the Earth, the Moon, and 
other planets.
Earth Moon Mars Venus Jupiter
Mass of 
the object 1 kg 1 kg 1 kg 1 kg 1 kg
Weight of 
the object 10 N 1.6 N 3.8 N 9 N 25.4 N
A step further
In everyday life, particularly for the goods we commonly use, we 
are more interested in the amount of matter in an object (its mass), 
rather than the force applied by the Earth upon it (its weight). 
However, though while the units of mass are used, instead of the 
term mass, the term weight is typically used. For example, it is said 
that the weight of the wheat bag is 10 kg. But in scientific use, this 
is not correct and it is important to use the correct terms with their 
correct units, even if every day language is more casual.
Chapter 5.indd 75 17-09-2025 01:59:38
Reprint 2026-27
