76
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Activity 5.13: Let us investigate
z Take an empty bottle (with its lid closed tightly) and a bucket 
full of water.
z Push the bottle in the water (Fig. 5.15). Do you feel an upward 
push? Release the bottle. Does it bounce up?
You would have felt an upward push and the bottle bounces 
back to the surface of the water. This indicates that water applies 
a force on the bottle in the upward direction. In fact, all liquids 
apply a similar force. The force applied by a liquid on an object 
in the upward direction is known as upthrust or buoyant force. 
When an object is placed in a liquid, the gravitational force due 
to the Earth acts on it downwards. But a buoyant force is applied 
on it by the liquid in the upward direction. If the gravitational 
force is more than the buoyant force, the object sinks, but if the 
two forces are equal, the object floats. One of the factors on which 
the buoyant force depends upon, is the density of the liquid. You 
will learn about density in a later chapter of this book.
Fig. 5.15: Bottle in 
water
A step further
Archimedes, a famous Greek scientist, discovered that when an 
object is fully or partially immersed in a liquid, it experiences an 
upward force which is equal to the weight of the liquid it displaces. 
This is known as Archimedes’ Principle. If the weight of a liquid 
displaced by an object is smaller than the weight of the object, the 
object will sink in the liquid. If the weight of the liquid displaced is 
equal to the weight of the object, the object will float in the liquid.
5.6 Floating and Sinking 
While taking out water from 
a bucket filled with water 
using a mug, do you notice 
that the mug feels lighter 
when it is inside water? Let 
us try to understand this.
If we place some objects on water, some of 
them float, while others fall to the bottom. 
The gravitational force of the Earth is 
acting on all objects, then why don’t all 
objects fall to the bottom?
Ever heard of ...
There are some rocks which can float on water. 
One such rock is Pumice, which is formed during 
volcanic eruptions. When lava with lots of gas and 
water vapour cools quickly, it traps tiny bubbles of 
gas inside. This creates a light, porous rock— filled 
with air pockets which is less dense than water and floats on it.
Chapter 5.indd 76 10-Sep-25 4:51:26 PM
Reprint 2026-27
