2
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Our journey with Curiosity, into the world of science continues 
in Grade 8. We hope you bring along the spirit of adventure and 
exploration that has guided us so far. In Grade 6, we discovered 
how science begins with wonder, with simple “Why?” and 
“How?” questions about the world around us.
In Grade 7, we learnt that science is always evolving—that 
each answer opens new questions, and how our ideas can slowly 
change as we explore deeper. Now, in Grade 8, we take the next 
step: entering the Investigative World of Science, where wonder 
and evolution come together to form the heart of how science 
works.
We don’t want you to just learn new facts, we want you to 
learn how to find new facts. Investigation in science means more 
than just looking at something and asking only simple questions. 
Now you can ask more focused questions, and design ways to 
perhaps do simple experiments to answer those questions, and 
then use your observations to improve your understanding.
Step by step, we will learn how to use questions as starting 
points to try to observe carefully, experiment thoughtfully, and 
explain clearly what we see. In doing so, each of you won’t just 
be learners but also investigators, young scientists, exploring 
real-world puzzles. These may range from everyday life—like 
why does dough rise?—to the bigger mysteries of Earth and 
beyond like is the world getting warmer?
As you turn each page of this book, we hope you notice the 
interesting design of our page numbers once again. On the 
left-hand pages, at the bottom, you’ll find the image of a root, 
symbolising the deep, solid foundation of knowledge that keeps 
us connected to our environment, traditions, and our cultural 
and natural heritage.
On the right-hand pages, in the top corner, you’ll find a 
kite soaring in the sky, reminding us that curiosity must take 
flight if we are to explore the unknown. Together, these two 
symbols—the root and the kite—invite you to stay grounded in 
real observations, while allowing your ideas to soar towards new 
horizons. Remember, investigation in science works best only 
when we balance the solid ground of careful observation with 
the freedom of creative thinking.
You will also notice some patterns in the lines at the bottom 
of the page. There are some hidden scientific thoughts in these as 
well. But don’t worry, they are mainly to make the page a little 
less boring. Let us now take a brief look at the various stops on 
our journey this year, and see where our curiosity, supported by 
strong roots and lifted by soaring ideas, might take us!
Chapter 1.indd 2 6/28/2025 11:38:53 AM
Reprint 2026-27
