4
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
So, these forces are connected to powerful weather 
events—like storms and cyclones—that affect our daily 
lives, agriculture, and even our safety.
To truly understand how air can exert pressure or 
why water boils at a certain temperature we need to 
zoom into these materials and see what kind of particles 
they are made up of, and how they move around.
Everything around us is made of tiny particles. 
In materials that are solid these particles cannot move 
much, while in gases they can move around freely.
Classifying things around us is an important feature 
of science. We can also classify materials around us 
into elements (pure substances), compounds (two 
or more elements bonded together), and mixtures 
(combinations that can be separated physically).
Once we know how particles combine or mix, we can then 
understand solutions—for example, how sugar dissolves in tea 
to make it sweet.
From the world of particles and 
mixtures, we then move into the world 
of light. We’ll study how light rays reflect 
off flat and curved mirrors, and bends 
when passing through lenses and helps 
us understand the working of many 
objects around us. The bending of light 
explains what happens when we see an image in a shiny 
metal spoon or how corrective glasses help many of us 
see clearly.
It’s not just a polished mirror that reflects light, 
rough surfaces reflect light as well, and so does the 
Moon. Depending on the relative positions of the Earth, 
Moon and Sun, a slightly different part of the Moon is 
illuminated each night, giving rise to the beautiful phases 
of the Moon that we see in the sky.
Watching the periodic cycles of the Moon’s phases allowed 
humans to come up with the first calendars. By combining careful 
observations of sunrises, sunsets, and lunar cycles, various 
calendars came into being. Isn’t it fascinating that the calendars 
which determine our routines on Earth are linked to the motions 
of objects far beyond our planet?
Chapter 1.indd 4 6/28/2025 11:39:12 AM
Reprint 2026-27
