6
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
To help you think like a scientist, let us go back to a question 
we asked on the first page: Why is one side of a puri thinner 
than the other?
Firstly, remember that science 
is everywhere! You don’t need 
a fancy laboratory to do simple 
experiments. Even your kitchen 
at home is a wonderful place to 
observe and ask questions. All 
you need is to start with curiosity, 
careful observation, and asking 
what happens if…? Have you 
noticed how a puri or a batura
puffs up when placed in hot oil? 
Or how a phulka swells when 
put directly on the flame. Why 
does it puff up like a balloon? And why is one side thinner than 
the other? These are questions a scientist might ask—and you 
can too! Let’s see how we can investigate this simple everyday 
phenomenon like a scientist would. 
First, we will try to ask a scientific question. What are
the different things that may change the way a puri puffs 
up when fried? To answer this, we may want to do some 
simple experiments. For that, we try and find out two main
things—what all can we change or control when we do the 
experiment, and what all can we observe to see if these changes 
made any difference. 
In this case, we can perhaps think of the changing the thickness 
and the size of the rolled dough. We could also try to use different 
types of flour (atta, maida, etc.). While frying the puri, we can also 
change the temperature of the hot oil, or try and drop the rolled 
dough into the oil in different ways (drop it vertically? slide it at 
an angle? slide it slowly?) Notice that these are things that we 
can control. 
However, to make sense of the changes, we also need to think 
of what we can observe or measure. Some of these may have 
just yes/no answers, in some cases there might be a number 
we can measure. Maybe we can start by checking whether the 
puri puffs up (yes/no), or we can measure the time it takes to 
puff up (seconds). We can check whether a very thick layer of 
dough still gives a thin side to the puri. Further, while doing such 
experiments, it is better to change only one thing at a time while 
keeping the other conditions same. For example, if we wanted to 
see the effect of boiling hot, hot, and not very hot oil, we would 
Chapter 1.indd 6 6/28/2025 11:39:20 AM
Reprint 2026-27
