42
Understanding Society:
India and Beyond
Grade 9 – Part 1 
 Stratosphere: Above the troposphere lies the stratosphere, 
extending up to 50 kilometres. This layer is ideal for flying 
aeroplanes because it is free of clouds and other weather 
disturbances. A notable feature of the stratosphere is that it 
contains a layer of ozone gas, which shields us by filtering the 
Sun’s harmful radiation, including ultraviolet radiation. The 
stratopause marks the boundary between the stratosphere and 
the mesosphere.
 Mesosphere: Above the stratosphere lies the third layer of the 
atmosphere, the mesosphere. It extends up to a height of 80 
kilometres. In this layer, temperature decreases with increasing 
altitude. Most meteorites entering from space burn up in the 
mesosphere. 
DON’T MISS OUT
Temperature decreases with altitude only in the troposphere 
and mesosphere.
 Thermosphere: In the thermosphere, temperature rises very 
rapidly with increasing altitude, as the gas molecules in this 
layer absorb the X-rays and short-wave ultraviolet radiation 
of the Sun. The thermosphere extends from 80 to 700 km. It 
also helps with radio transmission by reflecting radio waves 
transmitted from the Earth back towards it. Ionosphere is a part 
of the thermosphere. Additionally, the northern and southern 
lights (auroras) also occur in the thermosphere. 
Fig. 3.4: Aurora
The word ‘aurora’ originates from Latin, 
meaning ‘dawn’ or ‘morning light.’ It is 
named after the Roman goddess Aurora, the 
goddess of dawn , and refers to the colourful 
display of light seen in the sky near the 
poles. The ‘solar wind’ (charged particles 
emitted by the Sun), upon reaching the 
Earth’s atmosphere, is directed towards the 
magnetic poles. As these particles interact 
with different atmospheric gases, each 
gas glows with a particular colour. This 
phenomenon is known as the Aurora Borealis 
in the Northern Hemisphere and the Aurora 
Australis in the Southern Hemisphere.
Chapter 3.indd 42 17-Jun-26 7:52:16 PM
