43
3 – Atmosphere
and Climate
 Exosphere: The uppermost layer of the atmosphere is known 
as the exosphere, characterised by very thin air. Light gases like 
helium and hydrogen float into space from this layer due to 
weak gravity. All of these layers play a vital role in the Earth’s 
atmospheric processes and also affect its weather and climate.
DON’T MISS OUT
The air above us exerts a significant force on our 
bodies, and yet we do not feel it. This is because air 
presses on us from all sides, and our bodies exert a 
counter-pressure in response.
Fig. 3.5. The pressure inside our bodies is also equal to
the atmospheric pressure and cancels the pressure from
outside.
Weather and Climate
‘Is it going to rain today?’ ‘Will it be bright and sunny today?’ How 
often do you find yourself wondering about these questions when 
you want to go out and play? 
The term weather refers to the hour-to-hour and day-to-day 
conditions of the atmosphere. Hot or humid weather may make one 
irritable, while pleasant or breezy weather may make one cheerful, 
or even plan for an outing. Weather can vary significantly from 
day-to-day. The average weather conditions of a place over a longer 
period of time refer to the climate of the place. Climate refers to the 
sum total of weather conditions and variations over a large area for 
an extended period of time, usually thirty years or more. 
Elements of Weather and Climate
Various elements influence weather and climate. The major elements 
of atmosphere that impact human life on the Earth are temperature, 
precipitation, humidity, wind, and atmospheric pressure. These 
elements can change under varying conditions.
 Temperature: The temperature of the atmosphere varies not 
only between day and night but also across seasons, just as 
summers tend to be hotter than winters. An important factor 
affecting temperature distribution is insolation. The amount of 
Insolation: 
The incoming 
solar energy 
from the 
Sun that is 
intercepted 
by the Earth.
Chapter 3.indd 43 17-Jun-26 7:52:16 PM
