52
As a result, cold and dry winds blow from land to sea. These winds 
generally do not bring rainfall to most parts of India. However, when 
the north-east monsoon winds pass over the Bay of Bengal, they 
pick up moisture and cause rainfall in the eastern coast of India, 
especially in Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and parts of Karnataka. 
Thus, the winter monsoon is important for the rainfall of the 
south-eastern regions of India. 
Monsoon plays a vital role in the lives of people in India. Most of 
India’s agriculture depends on monsoon rainfall, as farmers rely 
on rain for sowing and growing crops. A good monsoon ensures 
sufficient food production and water supply in rivers, reservoirs, 
and wells. Monsoon also affects daily life, transport, festivals, and 
employment, especially in rural areas. However, excessive rainfall 
can cause floods, while weak monsoons can lead to droughts. Thus, 
monsoon greatly influences the economy, lifestyle, and livelihoods of 
people in India. 
DON’T MISS OUT
Kālidāsa, in Meghadūtam written around the 5th century CE, 
mentions the date of the onset of the monsoon over central India 
and also traces the path of monsoon clouds.
LET’S EXPLORE
Describe in your own words how monsoon affects the lives of the 
people around you.
DON’T MISS OUT
Under the National Monsoon Mission (NMM), Ministry of Earth 
Sciences (Government of India) has developed state-of-the-art 
weather and climate prediction models. The overall objective of 
the NMM is to enhance monsoon predictions for India over all 
time frames. 
‘Mission Mausam’ is designed to position India as a global leader in 
weather and climate sciences. The mission aims to make the nation 
‘Weather Ready’ and ‘Climate Smart’, meeting the global standards. 
It aims to improve weather and climate services, ensuring timely 
and precise observation, modelling, and forecasting information 
for multiple sectors, including agriculture, disaster management, 
and rural development. 
Chapter 3.indd 52 17-Jun-26 7:52:45 PM
