Elections
Chapter 7
1. Why are elections essential to a democratic system?
2. How do electoral systems and rules shape political representation
and fairness?
3. What role do institutions and laws play in ensuring free and fair
elections?
4. What challenges do elections face in practice, and how can these
challenges affect democracy?
The Big Questions
Why do Elections Matter? 
Elections are one of the most important processes for exercising 
democratic rights. Regular and periodic elections lie at the core of 
democracy. Representatives to public offices can be chosen through 
either direct or indirect elections. In India, members of the Lok 
Sabha at the central level, members of the Vidhan Sabha (Legislative 
Assembly) at the state level, and members of local bodies (like 
Panchayats, municipal corporations, etc.) are elected through direct 
elections every five years. In contrast, the President, Vice President, 
and members of the Rajya Sabha are elected through indirect 
elections.
You read about a case in Grade 8 where Gurmat was elected as class 
representative (CR). Can we allow her to continue as the CR in Grade 9
without facing a fresh election? Similarly, can the government 
continue beyond the prescribed term without seeking the people’s 
mandate again? And can we exercise our choice if only one political 
party is contesting the election? The answer to all these questions 
is No, because one of the most crucial elements of democracy 
is participating in the periodic election of those who will make 
decisions on our behalf. Elected representatives are accountable to 
the people. The right to elect our representatives and holding them 
accountable is ensured through periodic elections, and our vote is 
the principal means by which we exercise this right. 
Direct 
Elections: 
Elections in 
which citizens 
vote directly to 
choose their 
representatives 
or leaders.
Indirect 
Elections: 
Elections in 
which citizens 
vote for 
representatives 
who then 
choose/elect 
the leaders.
Chapter 7.indd 161 18-Jun-26 12:01:22 PM
