172
Understanding Society:
India and Beyond
Grade 9 – Part 1 
DON’T MISS OUT
The International Election Visitors’ Programme (IEVP) is a 
flagship programme of the ECI for international cooperation and 
engagement with Election Management Bodies (EMBs) of other 
countries and international organisations. The ECI has signed 
Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) with 28 EMBs and three 
international organisations, namely, the International Foundation 
for Electoral Systems (IFES), International Institute for Democracy 
and Electoral Assistance (International IDEA), and the United 
Nations.
Political Parties
How do we learn about various issues that affect citizens in their daily 
lives? How do voters get to know about the candidates contesting 
elections? How is the election agenda set? What role do political 
parties play in elections? There are often dozens of contestants 
for each constituency. Most candidates belong to a political party, 
though some contest independently. Voters learn about candidates, 
their policies, their vision for development, and their positions on 
various social, economic, cultural, and political issues primarily 
through the political parties.
They help ensure that the 
democracy functions effectively 
by providing governance, 
accountability, representation, 
and public engagement. 
You will become eligible to vote 
in another four or five years; 
however, you must have heard or 
read about various promises that 
political parties make during the 
election campaigns. They present 
their agenda, elaborate on their 
promises in election rallies, and 
discuss and debate on issues 
of local, state, national, and 
international concern through 
various media platforms. 
Political parties 
are essential to a 
democratic system, 
as they work directly 
at the grassroots 
level.
Enable voters to 
make informed 
decisions during 
elections.
Organise public 
opinion.
Campaign 
on specific 
issues.
Offer voters 
meaningful 
choices.
Fig. 7.9. Importance of Political Parties
Chapter 7.indd 172 17-Jul-26 4:52:22 PM
