Fo r e wo r d
The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 envisages a system of 
education in the country that is rooted in Indian ethos and its 
civilisational accomplishments in all domains of human endeavour 
and knowledge, while at the same time preparing the students to 
constructively engage with the prospects and challenges of the 
twenty-first century. The basis for this aspirational vision has been well 
laid out by the National Curriculum Framework for School Education 
(NCFSE) 2023 across curricular areas at all stages. Nurturing the 
students’ inherent abilities touching upon all the five planes of human 
existence, the pañchakośhas, in the Foundational and the Preparatory 
Stages has paved the way for the progression of their learning further 
at the Middle Stage. The Middle Stage acts as a bridge between the 
Preparatory and the Secondary Stages, spanning three years from 
Grade 6 to 8.
This framework, at the Middle Stage, aims to equip students with 
the skills that are needed to grow as they advance in their lives. It 
endeavours to enhance their analytical, descriptive, and narrative 
capabilities, and to prepare them for the challenges and opportunities 
that await them. A diverse curriculum, covering nine subjects ranging 
from three languages—including at least two languages native to 
India—to Science, Mathematics, Social Sciences, Art Education, Physical 
Education and Well-being, and Vocational Education promotes their 
holistic development.
Such a transformative learning culture requires certain essential 
conditions. One of them is to have appropriate textbooks in different 
curricular areas, as these textbooks will play a central role in mediating 
between content and pedagogy—a role that will strike a judicious 
balance between direct instruction and opportunities for exploration 
and inquiry. Among other conditions, classroom arrangement and 
teacher preparation are crucial to establish conceptual connections 
both within and across curricular areas.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training 
(NCERT), in its part, is committed to provide students with such high￾quality textbooks. Various Curricular Area Groups, which have been 
constituted for this purpose, comprising notable subject-experts, 
0 Prelims.indd 3 13-08-2024 16:10:14
Reprint 2026-27
