iv
pedagogues, and practising teachers as their members, have made 
all possible efforts to develop such textbooks. Ganita Prakash, the 
textbook of Mathematics for Grade 6, is one of these. The textbook 
is a captivating journey through the world of mathematics designed 
for Grade 6 students. The book begins with encouraging the students 
to observe and explore the patterns around them and discover 
mathematical concepts on their own. The book further delves into 
the realm of numbers, where young learners are introduced to 
the magic of numbers and shapes. Through colourful illustrations 
and interactive exercises, children develop a strong foundation in 
arithmetic, paving the way for more complex mathematical concepts. 
Throughout the book, stories, conversations and anecdotes have 
been incorporated to make abstract mathematical concepts more 
relatable and accessible to young learners. Content has been evolved 
using puzzles and innovative problems that will not only engage the 
students in thoughtfully relating the mathematical concepts to the 
world around them and help them in deepening their understanding 
of mathematics, but also prepare them to understand the concepts of 
the emerging field of Computational Thinking. Indian rootedness and 
relation to Indian Knowledge Systems (IKS) has been embedded in the 
content of the textbook.
However, in addition to this textbook, students at this stage should 
also be encouraged to explore various other learning resources. 
School libraries play a crucial role in making such resources available. 
Besides, the role of parents and teachers will also be invaluable in 
guiding and encouraging students to do so.
With this, I express my gratitude to all those who have been 
involved in the development of this textbook and hope that it will meet 
the expectations of all stakeholders. At the same time, I also invite 
suggestions and feedback from all its users for further improvement 
in the coming years.
New Delhi
July, 2024
Dinesh Prasad Saklani
Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training
0 Prelims.indd 4 13-08-2024 16:10:15
Reprint 2026-27
