Ab o u t t h e Bo o k
Mathematics helps students develop not only basic arithmetic skills, 
but also the crucial capacities of logical reasoning, creative problem 
solving, and clear and precise communication (both oral and written). 
Mathematical knowledge also plays a crucial role in understanding 
concepts in other school subjects, such as Science and Social Science, 
and even Art, Physical Education, and Vocational Education. Learning 
Mathematics can also contribute to the development of capacities 
for making informed choices and decisions. Understanding numbers 
and quantitative arguments is necessary for effective and meaningful 
democratic and economic participation. Mathematics thus has an 
important role to play in achieving the overall Aims of School Education.
Mathematics at the Middle Stage is a major challenge and has 
to perform the dual role of being both close to the experience and 
environment of the child and being abstract. It must perform the dual 
role of developing intuition while also maintaining and emphasising 
rigour. It must perform the dual role of enhancing critical and logical 
thinking while also developing artistry and creativity and a sense of 
elegance and aesthetics. Finally, Mathematics must perform the dual 
role of providing students plenty of opportunities for exploration and 
discovery of concepts on their own while also teaching best-known 
methods in the global repertoire of mathematics.
The present textbook has made an attempt to address the above￾mentioned goals and challenges of learning mathematics. The writers 
of this book have aimed to strike a judicious balance between informal 
and formal definitions and methods to develop in students both 
intuition and rigour. The book also provides numerous opportunities 
for student–student and student–teacher interaction in the classroom 
to promote active and experiential learning. A number of questions, 
puzzles, and interactive exercises are posed throughout the book to 
encourage constant exploration. Many of the questions are open￾ended to stimulate in-class discussion. Finally, some famous unsolved 
problems have also been included so that students can appreciate that 
Mathematics is still a very active subject, with much that is already 
known and discovered, but also many exciting frontiers that remain 
unknown and unseen. Such unknown realms and unresolved questions 
will require new ideas and a new generation of adventurers to explore 
and understand, and to thereby solve these exciting problems.
0 Prelims.indd 5 14-08-2024 14:18:41
Reprint 2026-27
