vi
Among the world’s greatest problem solvers and most creative minds 
of the current generation is world-renowned mathematician Manjul 
Bhargava. He has resolved decades-old, and in some cases centuries￾old, problems of a fundamental nature across Mathematics, particularly 
in the areas of number theory, algebra, representation theory, and 
arithmetic geometry. For his pioneering breakthroughs in Mathematics, 
in 2014 he became the first person of Indian origin to receive the Fields 
Medal, the highest honour given to mathematicians, awarded every 
four years and known as the ʻNobel Prize of Mathematics’. 
We are thrilled and honoured that the beautiful Chapter 1 of 
this book, ʻPatterns in Mathematics’, has been kindly composed and 
contributed by Professor Bhargava. In this chapter, in the section ʻWhat 
is Mathematics?’, Bhargava eloquently speaks of mathematics as a 
creative art—as a search for beautiful patterns, and the explanations of 
those patterns. In later sections of the chapter, he describes a sampling 
of some of the most basic patterns in mathematics—sequences of 
numbers and sequences of shapes—and their remarkable and often￾surprising interrelations. These patterns are regularly revisited in 
later chapters of this book, to emphasise the unity of mathematics, and 
will also be revisited in future years. We hope that this exploratory 
chapter will help in inspiring a new generation to explore and pursue 
mathematics.
Building on the idea of exploring patterns in mathematics, the 
book then turns to a journey across different areas of mathematics. 
Chapter 2, ‘Lines and Angles’, introduces the building blocks of 
geometry—points, line segments, rays, lines, angles, and how to measure 
angles. Chapter 3, ‘Number Play’, is an exploratory adventure through 
some instructive but fun games and puzzles in mathematics—some of 
which are still unsolved! Chapter 4, ‘Data Handling’, is an introduction 
to the art of collecting and presenting data, including both its analytic 
and aesthetic aspects. Chapter 5, ‘Prime Time’, is a playful adventure 
through prime numbers—the building blocks of the universe of whole 
numbers—and factorization. Chapter 6, ‘Perimeter and Area’, is a 
revision of these fundamental notions, with a variety of challenging 
puzzles to keep children on their toes and enhance understanding. 
Chapter 7, ‘Fractions’, will be many students’ first encounter with this 
important concept; the chapter aims to build intuition about fractions 
gradually, starting with fractional units like 1/10 as the foundation, 
and gradually building up to working with general fractions, including 
0 Prelims.indd 6 13-08-2024 16:10:15
Reprint 2026-27
