vii
their comparison, addition, and subtraction. Chapter 8, ‘Playing with 
Constructions’, is a hands-on experience of drawing shapes, including 
using a compass and a ruler, to enhance students’ geometric intuition 
and comprehension. Chapter 9, ‘Symmetry’, is an artistic and hands￾on exploration of this most important and ubiquitous concept in 
Mathematics and beyond. Finally, Chapter 10, ‘The Other Side of Zero’, 
aims for students to gain intuition for negative numbers by visiting 
Bela’s Building of Fun, and gradually working up to understanding 
the laws of addition and subtraction of all integers as laid down by 
Brahmagupta.
In all chapters, an attempt has been made to emphasise connections 
with other subjects including Art, History, and Science. Many pictures 
and drawings have been included to illustrate patterns, numbers, 
constructions, symmetry, games, puzzles, etc., to thereby develop 
visual and artistic imagination, intuition for mathematical objects and 
principles. The history of various mathematical concepts has been 
described, including Brahmagupta’s world-changing discoveries in the 
year 628 C.E. of the laws for addition and subtraction of fractions and of 
zero and negative numbers. Other discoveries from around the world, 
of unit fractions, searching for primes, Collatz Conjecture, Kaprekar 
numbers, etc., have also been described with their history to help students 
appreciate and humanize the joy and process of discovery. Examples 
from Science (the use of negative numbers to measure temperature or 
heights above or below sea level) also abound to illustrate the importance 
of the use of mathematical concepts in Science.
By weaving together storytelling and hands-on activities, we hope 
that an immersive learning experience will be created that ignites 
curiosity and fosters a love for mathematics. It is hoped that teachers 
would give children the opportunity to discuss, play, engage with 
each other, provide logical arguments for different ideas, and find 
loopholes in arguments presented. This is necessary for the learners 
to eventually develop the ability to understand what it means to prove 
something and also become confident about underlying concepts. 
The mathematics classroom should not expect a blind application 
of algorithms but should rather encourage children to find many 
different ways to solve problems.
As per the NEP 2020, Computational Thinking has also been gently 
introduced through puzzles, games, and interactive exercises that 
encourage such thinking. Indian rootedness has also been kept in 
0 Prelims.indd 7 13-08-2024 16:10:17
Reprint 2026-27
