viii
mind while giving contexts for different concepts. The contributions 
of Indian mathematicians have been given as part of a problem￾solving approach to make students aware of India’s rich mathematical 
heritage and its global contributions to mathematics.
The concepts and problems are related to daily life situations. An 
attempt has been made to use contexts and materials with which the 
students are familiar. Learning material sheets have been given at the 
back of the book that may be photocopied and used. At many places, 
exercises or activities are given to encourage peer group efforts and 
discussions. The textbook intends to address the learning needs of a 
diverse group of students in the classroom.
We have tried to link concepts learnt in initial chapters with 
ideas in subsequent chapters to show the connectedness and unity of 
mathematics. We hope that teachers will use this as an opportunity to 
revise these concepts in a spiralling way so that children are able to 
appreciate the entire conceptual structure of mathematics. We hope 
that teachers may give more time to the ideas of fractions, negative 
numbers and other notions that are new to students. Many of these 
are the basis for further learning in mathematics.
Finally, this book aims to be more than just a textbook—it’s a passport 
to a world of mathematical discovery and exploration. Whether used 
in the classroom or at home, we hope that it may inspire students to 
embark on their own mathematical adventures, empowering them 
to see the beauty and relevance of mathematics in everything around 
them. With its engaging approach and comprehensive coverage of Grade 
6 mathematics concepts, this book hopes and aims to captivate young 
minds and set them on a lifelong journey of mathematical discovery.
I thank again all the writers of and contributors to this textbook for 
this important and valuable contribution and service to the nation’s 
mathematics teachers, learners and enthusiasts.
We look forward to your comments and suggestions regarding the 
book and hope that you will send interesting exercises, activities and 
tasks that you develop during the course of teaching and learning, to 
be included in future editions.
Ashutosh Wazalwar
Professor, Academic Convener 
Department of Education in 
Science and Mathematics 
National Council of Educational
Research and Training
0 Prelims.indd 8 13-08-2024 16:10:17
Reprint 2026-27
