Ac know l e d g ements
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
acknowledges the guidance and support of the esteemed Chairperson 
and members of the Curricular Area Group (CAG): Mathematics 
and other concerned CAGs for their guidelines on cross-cutting 
themes in developing this textbook. During the development of 
this textbook, various workshops were organised and subject 
experts in Mathematics from different Institutions were invited. 
The NCERT acknowledges the valuable views and inputs given by 
subject experts—Shri V. Sivashankara Sastry, Math Communicator, 
Kolar; P. Satyanarayana Sarma, Guest Faculty, Department of 
Mathematics, K. B. N. College (Autonomous), Vijaywada, Andhra 
Pradesh; Suhas Saha, Head, Mathematics Department, ISHA Home 
School, Coimbatore; Priyavrat Deshpande, Associate Professor, 
CMI, Chennai; SadikAli Shaikh, Head, Department of Mathematics, 
Maulana Azad College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Aurangabad, 
Maharashtra; Jaspal Kaur, TGT (Maths), School of Excellence, 
Delhi; Bina Prakash, Sr. PGT (Maths), Campion School, Bhopal; 
Mahendra Shankar, Senior Lecturer (Retd.), NCERT, New Delhi; Ram 
Avatar, Professor (Retd.), NCERT, New Delhi; KASSV Kameshwar 
Rao, Associate Professor (Retd.), NCERT; Aditya Chandrashekhar 
Karnataki, Assistant Professor, Chennai Mathematical Institute, 
Chennai; Nagesh Mone, Principal (Retd.), Deccan Education Society’s 
Dravid High School, Wai, Maharashtra; R. Athmaraman, Mathematics 
Education Consultant, TI Matric Higher Secondary School and AMTI, 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu; Upendra Kulkarni, Associate Professor, Chennai 
Mathematical Institute, Chennai; Anupama S.M., Faculty, Azim 
Premji University; Sandeep Diwakar, Subject Expert-Mathematics, 
Azim Premji Foundation; Ashish Gupta, Resource Person, Azim 
Premji Foundation; Praveen Uniyal, Resource Person, Azim Premji 
Foundation; Ramchandar Krishnamurthy, Principal, Azim Premji 
School—for improving the content and pedagogy of the textbook. 
The Council acknowledges the academic and administrative 
support of Sunita Farkya, Professor and Head, DESM, NCERT, 
New Delhi.
0 Prelims.indd 13 13-08-2024 16:10:17
Reprint 2026-27
