No t e to t h e Teac h e r
We hope that this book, Ganita Prakash, will serve as a strong support 
and guide to you in achieving the exciting task that you have before 
you: that of passing on the joy of learning the beautiful subject of 
mathematics to the next generation.
This task calls for providing a fertile environment that allows for 
the flowering of mathematical thinking in the minds of students. 
Classrooms, where students just listen and write down whatever 
is being told to them or written on the board, are deficient in the 
conditions required for learning mathematics. Instead, classrooms 
need to be places where students are engaged in playing with 
mathematical concepts, finding and discussing patterns, and 
developing creative strategies together to solve problems. Students 
should also be posing problems to each other and discussing possible 
solutions with each other. In fact, these are the very conditions that 
have led to the development of the entire field of mathematics so far, 
and so one cannot expect students to pick up mathematical thinking 
and understanding without these conditions.
Fortunately, it is not difficult to create such conditions in the 
classroom. It just requires an interesting question, problem, pattern, 
or challenge to be thrown open to the students on a regular basis, and 
sufficient time to be given to them to play with, discuss, and work on 
it as a class or in pairs or groups. 
Along with it, an environment that accepts mistakes and 
acknowledges their importance in learning needs to be nurtured.
While creating the spark for initiating mathematical thinking in 
classrooms is not difficult, sustaining it may be challenging and may 
involve efforts from your side. Nevertheless, even if just the first part 
of throwing open a question, problem, pattern, or challenge is done 
at least once or twice a week, accompanied by sufficient waiting time 
from your side for students to play, discuss, and work on it, it can 
have a great positive impact on how the students view and approach 
mathematics.
It should be noted that this positive impact will not happen 
overnight. That takes time and depends on various factors such as the 
number of opportunities you give for problem solving, your patience, 
and the encouragement you give to the students. 
0 Prelims.indd 15 13-08-2024 16:10:18
Reprint 2026-27
