xvi
To support you in posing problems, all the problems or questions 
in this book are marked using the icon . This icon is an indicator 
of a potential opportunity to start off a process of problem solving 
and exploration in the classroom. You will find some of the problems 
labelled ‘Math Talk’. Such questions can especially be made as topics 
for classroom discussion.
To develop students’ mathematical thinking and understanding of 
concepts, a sufficient number of problems are given. Trying to ‘cover’ 
all of them must not happen at the cost of students not getting to spend 
quality time on playing with and discussing them. 
It is important to understand that the exploratory problems are not 
only for promoting problem solving skills; they also serve in strengthening 
procedural fluency when children start engaging in exploration.
Efforts must be made in making students independent learners. 
One essential aspect required for this is an ability to read and 
understand mathematical text. To promote this skill, students should 
be encouraged to read the book by themselves and in groups. Give 
opportunities to them to interpret what they read and express it to 
others. This will also address the big problem that students face in 
speaking mathematics and interpreting word problems. 
This book contains a number of open-ended problems. It also 
contains new treatments of certain concepts. If you are not able to 
solve them or follow some of them immediately, it is perfectly okay! 
Not everyone knows everything. Along with trying to understand 
and reflect upon such content, it will be very useful to take it to 
the classroom and open it up for discussion. After the discussion, 
things that are clear and those that are not yet clear can be clearly 
summarised. This process itself can throw a lot of light on the content. 
In these discussions, you can participate as a fellow seeker, and when 
students see a teacher seek and think to understand something, it sets 
a wonderful example for them.
It is hoped that you and your students will have a great and fruitful 
time using this book!
Summary of Key points 
Time for Exploration
1. It is important to routinely pose new problems, questions, patterns, 
or challenges to the students and give them sufficient time to play 
with, discuss, and work on them, individually and in groups.
0 Prelims.indd 16 13-08-2024 16:10:18
Reprint 2026-27
