Chapter 12 — How Nature Works in Harmony 191
In several parts of India, particularly in states like Odisha, 
Jharkhand, West Bengal, Assam, and Chhattisgarh, elephants 
often enter farms and villages. When vegetation is scarce and 
waterholes dry up in their natural habitat, elephants may wander 
into nearby farms or plantations in search of food like bananas 
and sugarcane. This can lead to crop damage and at times, even 
harm people and domestic animals. 
Changes in rainfall and temperature affect vegetation. Cutting 
down trees for constructing roads and buildings makes it worse. 
This leads to the drying and shrinking of forests, the natural home 
of animals. Because of loss of habitat, animals tend to move into 
human habitats. Elephants are adapted to forest life, but sudden 
changes make it hard for them to survive. Wildlife ecologists have 
identified and marked corridors in many parts of the country to 
allow safe movement of animals. These corridors connect forest 
habitats, enabling wildlife—such as elephants to travel in need 
between large forest areas without coming into conflict with 
human settlements.
This chain of events shows how closely nature’s elements are 
connected. To understand such interconnections, we must study 
the components of our environment.
12.1 How Do We Experience and Interpret 
Our Surroundings?
You have learnt in Curiosity, Grade 6 chapter ‘Diversity in the 
Living World’ that different habitats have different kinds of plants 
and animals. A habitat is simply place where an organism lives. 
It could even be just the bark of a tree. The plants and animals 
interact with each other and adapt to survive in the surrounding 
conditions they live in. Explore two nearby habitats and identify 
both the living organisms and the non-living components in each.
Activity 12.1: Let us explore
Caution: Explore the habitat in groups with your teacher.
z Identify two habitats in your surroundings. 
z These could be any two of the following: a pond, a forest, an 
agricultural farm, or even a large tree like banyan, mango, 
or pilkhan (white fig) tree.
z List the living beings and non-living things that you observe
in these habitats.
z Record your observations in Table 12.1.
Chapter 12.indd 191 01-Dec-25 2:36:56 PM
Reprint 2026-27
