Chapter 12 — How Nature Works in Harmony 195
two ponds — A with fish and large number of 
flowering plants around it; B without fish and 
fewer flowering plants around it (Fig. 12.3). 
Think of a reason for these observations.
z Compare the number of dragonflies, 
bees, and butterflies in both the ponds. 
Do you find any relationship between the 
number of dragonflies and bees/butterflies? 
We observed that in Pond A (with fish) the 
number of dragonflies were less as compared 
to Pond B. Why?
z Fish eat dragonfly larvae, so ponds with fish 
had fewer dragonflies. Dragonflies usually 
eat flies, bees and butterflies. With fewer 
dragonflies, more bees, flies, and butterflies 
were found. These insects help pollinate 
flowers from nearby areas moving pollen from one flower to 
another, which helps plants produce seeds. So, flowers near 
ponds with fish may produce more seeds than those near 
ponds without fish.
z What does this study show? How does the population of fish 
in a pond affect the seed production in nearby plants? 
z This study shows how biotic components (fish, dragonflies, 
pollinators, plants) and abiotic components (temperature, 
water, nutrients) interact with and affect each other 
(Fig. 12.4). Similarly, can overfishing by humans change this 
balance? How do you think it may affect the living and 
non-living parts of the habitat?
12.4 What Are the Different Types of Interactions 
Among Organisms and their Surroundings?
In Curiosity, Grade 7, you learn about how 
plants and animals need air, water, soil, and 
sunlight to grow. Living organisms, or the biotic 
community, depend on non-living things, that 
is abiotic components for their survival. Plants 
and animals also depend on each other for 
nutrition, respiration, and reproduction. These are 
interactions among the biotic components. Both 
types of interactions — among biotic components, 
and between biotic and abiotic components — are 
important for survival in any habitat.
Fig. 12.5: Biotic and abiotic interactions
Fig. 12.4: The red arrows represent 
the direct effect, and the green arrows 
represent the indirect effect
+ +
+
+
–
–
–
Dragonfly
Larval
dragonfly
St. John’s 
wort Fish
Chapter 12.indd 195 1/28/2026 4:38:11 PM
Reprint 2026-27
