Chapter 12 — How Nature Works in Harmony 197
In Activity 12.4, you understood different 
types of interactions occur within a habitat. From 
this, you can infer that the biotic components 
(plants, animals, and microorganisms) and the 
abiotic components (air, water, soil, sunlight, 
and temperature) in a habitat interact with each 
other to form an ecosystem. Organisms in an 
ecosystem interact with abiotic components 
for food, shelter, and protection. Different 
communities of living organisms interact with 
abiotic components in an ecosystem. There are 
two main types of ecosystems in nature. Aquatic 
ecosystems include ponds, rivers, and lakes 
while terrestrial ecosystems include forests, 
farms or even large trees like banyan, mango, or pilkhan. Hence, 
ecosystems can be large or small. Can you find overlapping 
ecosystems in Fig. 12.6? 
Fig. 12.6 shows an overlap of different terrestrial and 
aquatic ecosystems. In this figure, you can see a small river (an 
aquatic ecosystem) along with mountains, forests, grassland, 
and farmland, which are examples of terrestrial ecosystems. 
Farmland is a human-made ecosystem. These ecosystems are 
interacting with each other at any given point.
In Activity 12.4, we have seen the importance of the components 
and their interactions in an ecosystem. For example, sunlight, 
carbon dioxide, and water are essential for producing food in plants; 
soil provides medium and essential nutrients for plant growth; air 
provides oxygen for respiration in plants as well as animals; water is 
essential for all living organisms. This shows how living organisms 
depend on the non-living component of an ecosystem.
Just as biotic components depend on abiotic components, 
abiotic components are also influenced by biotic components. 
For example, plants release oxygen during photosynthesis, roots 
hold soil in place and prevent erosion, and plants retain soil 
moisture and help cool the atmosphere.
You can identify and study any ecosystem in your surroundings 
and observe different types of interactions among the biotic and 
abiotic components. While studying biotic interactions, notice 
how organisms depend on each other for food.
Activity 12.5: Let us classify
Observe Fig 12.1b, which illustrates a forest ecosystem.
z Study the picture carefully and spot the organisms listed in 
Table 12.4.
Fig. 12.7: Individual 
to ecosystem
Community
Population
Ecosystem
Individual
Fig. 12.6: Overlap of terrestrial and 
aquatic ecosystems
Chapter 12.indd 197 18-Dec-25 4:25:45 PM
Reprint 2026-27
