Chapter 12 — How Nature Works in Harmony 201
important nutrients to the soil. You can also find tiny insects, 
such as beetles and flies, on animal droppings—like elephant 
dung—as they help break it down and recycle nutrients, back into 
the environment. This process is called decomposition and the 
organisms carrying out the process are called decomposers or 
saprotrophs (sapro= rotten + trophs = food). Plants grow in soil 
and many of the nutrients in soil come from the decomposition 
process. Thus, decomposers play an important role in recycling 
nutrients. In nature, nothing is wasted—everything is reused. 
Does nature really waste anything?
Ever heard of ...
India is a country with diverse habitats and seasons. Many migratory 
birds fly thousands of miles and reach different habitats in India. They 
migrate from different parts of the world to avoid harsh climate, and in 
search for food. Birds not only enhance the aesthetics of those habitats 
but also play a significant role in keeping the balance in an ecosystem 
as pollinators or seed dispersers along the path they migrate. This 
way they link two habitats. These birds are predators of insect pests 
and help farmers to control pest populations, and indirectly help 
in healthy crop growth. Migratory birds, Demoiselle Crane visit the 
water body of Khichan village in Jodhpur district during the winter 
months. Do you know which birds in your area are seen only during 
winter? Collect postal stamps and covers of migratory birds released 
by the Indian Postal Department, and collect information about their 
place of origin and reasons for their migration to different localities 
in India and more. Showcase the postal stamps in your science 
laboratory/school library to popularise migratory birds.
12.7 How Does One Change Lead to Another? 
Look at Fig. 12.13. It shows how one small change can lead to 
many others. For example, many plants in a pond start dying 
because of pollution. With fewer plants less oxygen will be 
Chapter 12.indd 201 6/28/2025 6:10:00 PM
Reprint 2026-27
