Chapter 12 — How Nature Works in Harmony 203
z Mutualism: Both organisms 
benefit. For example: 
Honeybees and flowers.
z Commensalism: One 
organism benefits while the 
other is not affected. For 
example: Orchids on trees.
z Parasitism: One organism 
benefits while the other is 
harmed. For example: Ticks 
on the body of dogs.
These interactions are all part 
of the complex web of life in an 
ecosystem.
Fig. 12.16: Different types of interactions between organisms
Flower gets pollinated 
(Benefitted)
Orchid gets physical 
support  (Benefitted)
The dog gets skin 
irritation   (Harmed) 
Bee gets nectar 
(Benefitted)
Tree branch is 
unaffected 
The tick feeds on dog 
blood   (Benefitted) 
Be a scientist
Asir Jawahar Thomas Johnsingh (A.J.T. Johnsingh) 
was a famous Indian wildlife biologist who helped 
us understand forest ecosystems through the eyes of 
animals. He was a pioneer in studying wildlife through 
modern tracking system. His research showed how 
predators like tigers and leopards rely on prey, such as 
deer and wild boar, while he was working in Bandipur 
National Park, Karnataka. He proved that a healthy prey 
population is key to predator survival. He inspired many youngsters 
to study wildlife and protect the forests and biodiversity of India.
12.9 What Are the Benefits of an Ecosystem?
We have learnt that biotic components and abiotic components 
of an ecosystem depend on each other and support various life 
processes. Humans also benefit from ecosystems. For example, 
forests provide fresh air, fertile soil, food, fibres, timber, and 
medicines. Similarly, aquatic ecosystems provide water and 
food. Ecosystems also offer aesthetic and recreational value. 
These support our well-being and shows how closely nature and 
humans are connected. However, when we overuse or misuse 
natural resources, we disturb the balance in nature.
Now let us look at a real-life example of a threatened ecosystem 
— the Sundarbans.
Chapter 12.indd 203 01-Dec-25 2:45:37 PM
Reprint 2026-27
