204
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
The Sundarbans have the 
largest mangrove forests in the 
world. Located where the Ganges 
and Brahmaputra Rivers meet 
between India and Bangladesh, the 
Sundarbans’ forests and rivers are 
home to various flora and fauna, 
many of which are endangered. The 
Sundarbans protect us by slowing 
down strong winds and waves 
during storms and floods. The trees 
also absorb carbon dioxide from 
the air and release oxygen. Because 
of its importance, The United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) declared the Sundarbans a World 
Heritage Site in 1987. However, the Sundarbans (Fig.  12.17) are 
under a serious threat. Mangrove trees are being cut for fuelwood 
and farming. Illegal hunting and overuse of forest resources are 
a threat to the wildlife living there. Pollution from industrial 
waste and untreated sewage in rivers are also damaging the 
water and habitat. These human activities disrupt the natural way 
ecosystems work.
Similarly, other ecosystems across India are also under threat. 
Problems like deforestation, overuse of natural resources, the 
spread of invasive species, unsustainable land use, and pollution 
are damaging forests, rivers, scrublands, wetlands, grasslands, 
and coastal areas.
How can we stop damaging forests, rivers, and wetlands? 
Think about what actions you and your community can take to 
protect these important places.
Protected areas are parts of land or water set aside to conserve wildlife 
and their habitats. India has many protected areas like national parks, 
wildlife sanctuaries, biosphere reserves, and community conserved 
areas. These places help protect entire habitats including endangered 
animals, birds, and many rare plants. Famous examples include Jim 
Corbett National Park (Uttarakhand), Manas National Park (Assam), 
Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve (Western Ghats), Chilika Lake (Odisha), 
Eaglenest Wildlife Sanctuary (Arunachal Pradesh), Hemis National 
Park (Leh), Keibul Lamjao National Park (Manipur), Pirotan Island 
Marine National Park (Gujarat). Protected areas play a big role in 
saving nature for future generations.
Our scientific heritage
Fig. 12.17: Mangrove forest in Sundarbans
Chapter 12.indd 204 01-07-2025 12:18:26
Reprint 2026-27
