Chapter 12 — How Nature Works in Harmony 205
12.9.1 Human-made ecosystems
Humans have created artificial ecosystems like fish ponds, 
farms, and parks to meet their needs. When well designed, these 
can help reduce pollution, support biodiversity, and provide 
recreational spaces for people. Unlike natural ecosystems, these 
need human care and management. Can you name any human 
made ecosystem in your area?
12.9.2 How do healthy ecosystems serve our farms?
Farming, a major livelihood in India, can become unsustainable 
if not managed well by applying environment friendly farming 
practices.
Humans have been practising farming for thousands of 
years to grow food. As the population grew, our dependence on 
agriculture increased. Between 1950 and 1965, India faced a food 
crisis due to low crop production. In the mid-20th century, the 
use of tractors, machines, synthetic fertilisers, and pesticides 
helped increase food production. This period is known as the 
Green Revolution. However, these farming methods are now 
considered unsustainable because of the overuse of synthetic 
chemicals, excessive groundwater extraction, and growing only 
one type of crop for commercial gain. How do these practices 
harm both the environment and human health?
Many scientists believe that overusing pesticides and growing 
the same type of crop repeatedly on the same land leads to soil 
degradation. Understanding ecosystems can help us adopt better 
and more sustainable farming practices.
Activity 12.10: Let us survey
Visit a nearby farm with your parents or teacher/interact with 
farmers in your community to find out about the farming 
practices they adopt.
z Prepare a list of questions for farmers to find out the 
pesticides and other farm inputs they use, and whether they 
reuse or recycle materials to improve their crops. Here are 
some sample questions:
{ How have your farming practices changed over time? 
And why?
{ What effects do you notice when using synthetic fertilisers 
and pesticides?
{ Have you seen any changes in soil health after using these 
synthetic fertilisers and pesticides?
z Interact with farmers based on these questions. Based on 
your findings, prepare a report.
Chapter 12.indd 205 01-07-2025 12:18:40
Reprint 2026-27
