Chapter 8 — Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and Mixtures 117
Have you ever wondered what the world around you is made 
of? Look around! The staircase you use, the air you breathe, the 
water in your bottle, the food in your lunch box, the clothes and 
shoes you wear, the book you read, the trees outside, the ball you 
play with and even the stick you carry—all of these are examples 
of matter, which you have learnt in earlier grades. 
You have also learnt that all these things are made up of tiny 
particles. Most of the things around us are not made of just one 
substance; rather they are made up of two or more substances 
mixed together. Let us now understand how different substances 
come together to form mixtures.
8.1 What Are Mixtures?
Have you ever wondered what makes 
your poha (Fig. 8.1) so delicious or how 
to make the perfect sprout salad? While 
these dishes may seem very different, they 
share something in common—they are 
both made by mixing several ingredients. 
We observe the mixing of substances in 
everyday life. Sugar dissolved in water 
is also a mixture, and so are soups and 
lemonade. 
When two or more substances are 
mixed, where each substance retains 
its properties, it is called a mixture. 
The individual substances that make up 
a mixture are called its components. 
The components of a mixture do not 
react chemically with each other. In some 
mixtures, the components—like green 
gram, chickpeas, onion, and tomato 
in a sprout salad (Fig. 8.2), are easy to 
see. Such mixtures, where the different 
components are generally visible with the naked eye or with a 
magnifying device, are non-uniform in nature. Can you identify
a few more examples of non-uniform mixtures around you?
On the other hand, some mixtures have components that 
cannot be seen separately even with the help of a microscope.
For example, sugar and water particles cannot be seen separately 
in their mixture. Such types of mixtures, where the components 
are evenly distributed and cannot be distinguished, are uniform
in nature (Fig. 8.3). Can you list a few uniform mixtures?
Fig. 8.1: Poha
Fig. 8.2: Sprout salad
Fig. 8.3: Uniform mixture 
of sugar and water
Chapter 8.indd 117 6/28/2025 2:51:20 PM
Reprint 2026-27
