118
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Mishraloha was the name given to the mixture of two or more metals 
that had properties distinct from its constituent metals. Ancient 
Indian texts, such as the Charaka Samhita, Susruta Samhita, Rasaratna 
Samucchaya, Rasa Jala Nidhi, etc., mention the use of alloys for 
medicinal purposes. For example, Bronze, also known as Kamsya, is 
an alloy made up of Copper (Tamra, 4 parts) and Tin (Vanga, 1 part), 
was used to improve digestion and boost immunity.
Our scientific heritage
8.1.1 Is air a mixture?
In Curiosity, Grade 6, you learnt about air and its composition in 
the chapter ‘Nature’s Treasures’. Is air a mixture? What kind of 
mixture is it? 
You have learnt that air is a uniform mixture of mainly 
nitrogen, oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, and water vapour. Out of 
these, oxygen is required by most of the living beings to stay alive. 
It also helps in combustion. Nitrogen, which constitutes about 78% 
of the air, does not take part in combustion. We also learnt that air 
has water vapour in it. When warm air touches a cool surface, the 
water vapour turns into liquid water, forming tiny droplets. Recall 
the experiment where you tested the presence of carbon dioxide 
in the air that we exhale. Let us confirm the presence of carbon 
dioxide in the air.
Activity 8.1: Let us experiment
z Take a glass tumbler and fill it half with water.
z Add a small amount of calcium oxide 
(quick lime) slowly to it.
z What do you observe?
z Calcium oxide reacts vigorously with 
water to form calcium hydroxide and releases heat. 
Safety first
Perform this step carefully.
A step further
Do you know that stainless steel is also a mixture? 
Stainless steel contains iron, nickel, chromium, 
and a small amount of carbon. They are mixed 
so uniformly that the entire mixture appears 
the same throughout and one cannot see the 
individual substances. Such mixtures are known 
as alloys. Brass, a mixture of copper and zinc, 
and bronze, a mixture of copper and tin, are 
some other examples of alloys (Fig. 8.4).
Fig. 8.4: Utensils made of 
stainless steel, brass, and bronze
Chapter 8.indd 118 6/28/2025 2:51:32 PM
Reprint 2026-27
