Chapter 8 — Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and Mixtures 119
z Stir continuously to make a solution of calcium 
hydroxide. This solution is called lime water.
z Filter it and observe its colour.
z Leave this colourless solution in a petri dish for a few 
hours (Fig. 8.5a).
z Keep stirring the solution at regular intervals.
z What do you observe (Fig. 8.5b)? 
z Does it turn milky? 
Can you explain why the solution has turned milky?
You know that lime water turns milky when carbon 
dioxide reacts with calcium hydroxide to form calcium 
carbonate (insoluble tiny white particles) and water 
(Fig. 8.5). Since lime water turns milky when exposed to 
air, this activity demonstrates the presence of carbon 
dioxide in the air. 
Calcium hydroxide + Carbon dioxide Calcium carbonate + Water
Apart from gases, have you ever observed anything 
else present in the air? Have you ever noticed tiny shining 
particles moving in a beam of sunlight entering a dark room 
through a small opening? What are these particles? 
Activity 8.2: Let us explore
z Take a black sheet of paper. Ensure that it is free from 
any visible dust particles.
z Place the black sheet of paper undisturbed near an open 
window (Fig. 8.6a), or in the garden, for a few hours.
z What do you observe?
You may notice tiny particles settled on its surface. You 
may use a magnifying glass to examine the particles more 
closely (Fig. 8.6b).
This shows that dust particles are suspended in the air. 
They are not an integral part of the air and are considered 
pollutants. The nature and the number of dust particles in 
the air may vary from time to time and from place to place.
A step further
The major pollutants present in the air are particulate matter 
(dust, soot) and gases like carbon monoxide, ozone, nitrogen 
dioxide, and sulfur dioxide. The air quality index (AQI) is a 
tool used to describe the air quality.
Lime 
water 
turns 
milky
Lime 
water
Petri 
dish 
Petri 
dish 
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8.5: Lime water turns milky 
in the presence of carbon dioxide
(b)
Fig. 8.6: Black sheet of paper 
(a) with no dust particles; 
(b) with dust particles
(a)
Chapter 8.indd 119 6/28/2025 2:51:37 PM
Reprint 2026-27
