120
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
8.1.2 Types of mixtures
You know that the term ‘mixture’ in common usage refers to the 
mixing of two or more components. The components of a mixture 
may themselves be mixtures, as in poha and sprout salad, or 
pure substances like sugar or common salt dissolved in water. 
However, in science, all the components of a mixture must be 
pure substances only.
Mixtures could be of several types depending on the physical 
state of their components. Some mixtures with their examples are 
shown in Table 8.1. Complete the third column—
S.No. Mixture-type Examples Uniform or 
non-uniform
1. Gas and gas Air Uniform
2. Gas and liquid Aerated water (soda water)
Oxygen dissolved in water
…………………
…………………
3. Solid and gas Carbon particles in air …………………
4. Liquid and 
liquid
Acetic acid in water (vinegar) 
Oil and water
…………………
…………………
5. Solid and liquid Sand and water 
Seawater
…………………
…………………
6. Solid and solid Baking powder (baking soda and 
tartaric acid) 
Alloys
…………………
…………………
Table 8.1: Different types of mixtures
You learnt in earlier grades about the separation of mixtures. It 
is done to separate the components of a mixture. The examples 
discussed were from everyday life, where separation is done 
to obtain the component of interest and other components are 
discarded. However, in science, the purpose of separating a 
mixture is to obtain pure substances.
8.2 What Are Pure Substances?
Have you ever noticed the word ‘pure’ written on the packs of 
some consumables, such as milk, ghee, and spices (Fig. 8.7)? The 
word ‘pure’ has slightly different meanings in common usage 
and in science.
In common usage, ‘pure’ means unadulterated products. 
Adulteration is an illegal process of adding substances which 
are cheaper, or of a poor quality, to a product. This is usually 
done to increase the quantity or reduce the manufacturing cost. 
However, it deteriorates the quality of the product. It can also 
make the product hazardous to health. 
 Fig. 8.7: Some 
consumable items
Chapter 8.indd 120 6/28/2025 2:51:38 PM
Reprint 2026-27
