Chapter 8 — Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and Mixtures 121
In science, however, a pure substance is the one that has no 
other substance present in it. For a scientist, even these products 
that look pure can be considered impure if they are made of 
more than one substance.
A pure substance is a kind of matter that cannot be separated 
into other kinds of matter by any physical process. When a 
scientist says that something is pure, it means that the substance 
consists of the same type of particles.
A step further
According to science, how would you classify milk, packed 
fruit juice, baking soda, sugar, and soil—as mixtures or pure 
substances?
8.3 What Are the Types of Pure Substances?
Recall the different states of water that you studied in Curiosity, 
Grade 6. What happened when water was cooled or heated? 
We observed that on cooling water gets converted into ice, and 
on boiling it gets converted into vapour. We can get back water 
up on heating ice or cooling water vapour. It shows that during 
these processes, the particles of water remain the same. Now, let 
us perform another activity in which we pass electricity through 
water and observe its effect. 
Activity 8.3: Let us experiment 
(Demonstration activity)
(a) Test tubes filled with water
Test tubes 
Water
Test tube 
stand
z Collect two small test tubes, a beaker or a glass 
tumbler, and a 9 V battery.
z Fill 2/3rd of the beaker with water and add a few drops of 
dilute sulfuric acid to it. 
z Fill both the small test tubes completely with water taken 
from the beaker (Fig. 8.8a).
z Place a 9 V battery inside the beaker (Fig. 8.8b). 
z Without spilling the water, carefully place the water-filled 
test tubes on each of the terminals of the battery (Fig. 8.8c).
(b) 9 V battery placed inside 
the beaker containing water
Beaker 
Water
9 V 
battery
Safety first
This activity must be performed under the 
supervision of the teacher. Be careful while 
handling sulfuric acid. Do not use lithium-ion 
battery.
Chapter 8.indd 121 01-Dec-25 2:35:24 PM
Reprint 2026-27
