124
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
8.3.2 Compounds
Why cannot we separate hydrogen and oxygen present 
in water by physical means?
In water, the particles of hydrogen and oxygen are 
so tightly attached to each other that it is generally 
impossible to separate them apart using physical 
methods. That is why water is a compound. Compounds
are formed when different elements combine in fixed 
ratios to form something entirely new.
The properties of compounds are different 
from those of elements forming that 
compound. The constituent elements of 
a compound cannot be separated by any 
physical method. From Activity 8.3, we 
find that molecules of water are made of two different elements: 
hydrogen and oxygen (Fig. 8.11), combined chemically in a fixed 
ratio. The ratio of the number of atoms of hydrogen to oxygen in 
water has been found to be 2:1.
Are common salt and sugar elements or compounds? Let us 
find out.
Sodium, a soft metal, and chlorine, a hazardous gas, combine 
to form a harmless yet taste-enhancing substance that is essential 
for our lives. This substance is known as sodium chloride, which 
is made up of particles of sodium and chlorine in a 1:1 ratio. We 
learnt that dissolved sodium chloride (common salt) may be 
separated from water by the physical process of evaporation.
Is it possible to separate sodium chloride into its elements by 
physical processes? 
Let us now explore if we can separate the elements in sugar!
Activity 8.4: Let us experiment
z Put a teaspoon of sugar in a boiling tube. 
z Heat it gently as shown in Fig. 8.12a.
z What do you observe?
Oh! This is really 
fascinating—hydrogen is 
a fuel, oxygen supports 
combustion, whereas 
water extinguishes fire.
Safety first
This activity must be performed 
in the presence of a teacher.
A step further
More than 45 different elements, like aluminium, copper, silicon, 
cobalt, lithium, gold, silver, etc., are used in manufacturing a mobile 
phone, including its screen, battery, and other components.
A step further
Oxygen
Hydrogen 
Fig. 8.11: Depiction of 
molecules of water
Chapter 8.indd 124 6/28/2025 2:51:50 PM
Reprint 2026-27
