128
Curiosity — Textbook of Science for Grade 8
Some discussion points
z Do the Samples, A and B look the same?
z Which sample exhibits magnetic properties?
z Can we separate the components of Samples A and B?
z On adding dilute hydrochloric acid, do gases evolve in both 
Samples A and B? 
z In both the cases, do the gases smell the same or different?
z Also, categorise the substances used in this activity into 
mixtures, compounds, and elements.
Sample A: We can say that Sample A is a mixture of the two 
elements—iron and sulfur. Its components retain their properties, 
and their black and yellow coloured particles can be seen.
On bringing magnet near Sample A, the iron filings get attracted 
towards the magnet. Hence, iron and sulfur can be separated.
You might have observed that in Sample A, iron in the mixture 
reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to form iron chloride and 
hydrogen gas. The gas is colourless, has no smell, and burns with 
a ‘pop’ sound.
The reaction can be represented as—
Iron + Dilute Hydrochloric acid Iron chloride + Hydrogen gas
Sulfur on the other hand, is left as a yellow solid at the bottom 
of the test tube. This shows that sulfur does not react with 
hydrochloric acid.￼
Sample B: The black mass obtained in Sample B is iron sulfide.
We observe that the texture and the colour are the same throughout. 
It is formed by heating the two elements, iron and sulfur. It is not 
attracted by a magnet. The new substance has completely different 
properties, and iron and sulfur can no longer be separated. Hence, 
we can say that a compound has been formed. Can you explain 
now why the magnet has no effect on Sample B?
Also, Sample B, iron sulfide, reacts with dilute hydrochloric 
acid, to form iron chloride and hydrogen sulfide gas. The gas is 
colourless and has a rotten egg-like odour. 
The reaction can be represented as—
Sample A
Sample B
Iron sulfide + Dilute Hydrochloric acid Iron chloride + Hydrogen sulfide
8.4 How Do We Use Elements, Compounds, 
and Mixtures?
Elements, compounds, and mixtures are all around us. The 
air we breathe is a mixture of gases like oxygen, nitrogen, and 
carbon dioxide. Water, which is essential for life, is a compound 
Chapter 8.indd 128 6/28/2025 2:52:01 PM
Reprint 2026-27
