Chapter 8 — Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and Mixtures 129
made of elements, hydrogen and oxygen. Elements like iron and 
aluminium are used to construct bridges, buildings, and vehicles.
Understanding these concepts is not just about recognising 
what surrounds us; it is also the key to innovation. For instance, 
chemists study how elements combine to create compounds, 
enabling them to invent life-saving medicines and vaccines to fight 
diseases. This knowledge also helps in the creation of fertilisers 
thereby enhancing crop production that feeds the ever-increasing 
human population globally.
Engineers and material scientists rely on their understanding of 
compounds and mixtures to design materials with unique properties. 
For example, they have developed alloys like stainless steel, which is 
stronger and more durable than pure iron. Wood, steel, and concrete, 
which are used as building materials, are all mixtures.
You learnt that various metals are obtained from minerals. 
Let us learn about these minerals.
An example of a ‘wonder’ material 
developed by material scientists is graphene 
aerogel. This is made from carbon and is 
said to be the lightest material on earth. It is 
so light that even grass can hold it (Fig. 8.21). 
It is highly porous and therefore, has a high 
absorbing capacity. For this reason, it can 
potentially be used as an environmental cleaner, for example, to 
clean up oil spills in both seas and on land. It is useful in fabricating
energy-saving devices and special coatings for buildings.
Fig. 8.21
A step further
8.5 What Are Minerals?
Most rocks are a mixture of minerals, which can be 
viewed with the eyes, or by using a magnifying glass or 
a microscope. Some of the minerals are called native 
minerals, which are pure elements and not compounds. 
These can be metals, such as gold, silver, copper, etc., or 
non-metals like sulfur, carbon, etc. 
Most of the minerals are compounds made up of more 
than one element. Some common examples of minerals 
include quartz, calcite, mica, pyroxene, and olivine 
(Fig. 8.22). Many things that we use in our everyday life are 
made up of minerals or elements extracted from minerals. 
For example, cement is made from calcite, quartz, alumina, 
and iron oxide, which are minerals or are obtained from 
minerals. Talcum powder is made from the mineral talc.
Pyroxene
Olivine Talc
Quartz Calcite
Mica
Fig. 8.22: Some minerals
Chapter 8.indd 129 6/28/2025 2:52:05 PM
Reprint 2026-27
