170Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Pilgrimages
Many Indians undertake tīrthayātrās or pilgrimages to various 
sacred sites (tīrthas) during their lifetime. This ancient and 
continuous tradition of pilgrimage is not just a physical journey 
but also an inner journey that requires a specified code of 
conduct.
For at least 3,000 years, and with no modern means of 
transportation available, Indians have been crisscrossing the 
Subcontinent, resulting in its entire geography being considered 
sacred. We will return to this soon.
Tīrtha:
Literally, a 
place where 
one can cross 
a river or 
other body 
of water. 
Symbolically, 
it becomes a 
place where 
one can 
cross from 
the ordinary 
worldly life 
to a higher, 
spiritual 
life. Such 
places are 
held in high 
reverence 
and regarded 
as sacred.
India has, for ages past, been a country of pilgrimages. 
All over the country, you find these ancient places, from 
Badrinath, Kedarnath and Amarnath, high up in the snowy 
Himalayas down to Kanyakumari in the south. What has 
drawn our people from the south to the north and from 
the north to the south in these great pilgrimages? It is the 
feeling of one country and one culture.
 — Jawaharlal Nehru, 1961
Here’s an excerpt from the writings of Dharampal, a historian 
and thinker: 
“I was travelling from Gwalior to Delhi … when I met a group of 
people … about twelve of them, some three or four women and 
seven or eight men ... They said that they had been on a pilgrimage, 
three months long, up to Rameswaram, among other places. They 
came from two different villages north of Lucknow. They had 
various bundles of things and some earthen pots with them ... They 
had taken all the necessities for their food—atta, ghee, sugar—
with them … I asked them, “You are going to Delhi now?” “Yes!”, 
they replied. “You will stop in Delhi?” “No, we only have to change 
trains there. We’re going to Haridwar! ... We don’t have time … We 
have to go to Haridwar. And then we have to get back home.”
Chapter 8.indd 170 08-04-2025 12:53:23
Reprint 2026-27
