173Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 – How the Land Becomes Sacred
Becoming Aware of Sacred Geography
Some sacred places are marked on the map (Fig. 8.6) given 
on the next page. Though spread all over India, they are also 
interconnected. For example, some Hindus aspire to do the chār 
dhām yātrā, and those four sites appear to have been deliberately 
located in the southern, northern, eastern and 
western corners of India! A similar aspiration 
exists with respect to the 12 jyotirlingas, which are 
considered highly auspicious. The 51 Shakti pīṭhas, 
too, cover the entire map of India (even parts of 
present-day Bangladesh and Pakistan). And there 
are many more regional networks. 
These networks crisscross India’s length and 
breadth, creating a sacred geography. As a result, 
the land itself becomes sacred.
There is a story about the 51 Shakti pīṭhas. Shakti, the divine 
mother in the form of Satī, and her consort, Śhiva, were insulted 
by her father. An angry Satī immolated herself. Shiva was so 
livid that he took her body and refused to allow the last rites. 
Śhiva’s anger was dangerous for the world and the cosmos. So 
Viṣhṇu used his chakra to cut up Satī’s body. The Shakti pīṭhas
are the places across the Subcontinent where the body parts of 
the divine mother fell one by one. The symbol behind the story 
is clear: the whole land becomes the body of the divine mother. 
LET’S EXPLORE
Note the locations of the chār dhām. What do you think it 
implied for the people when they travelled north-south and 
east-west?
While visiting the major sacred places connected to their 
respective faiths, pilgrims would naturally cover the geography 
of India. They would come across diverse languages, customs, 
clothing and foods along the way, but would notice the 
commonalities too. 
The 12 jyotirlingas
are sacred shrines 
dedicated to Śhiva, 
a major deity of 
Hinduism. Each 
shrine has its own 
unique mythology 
and name. 
Chapter 8.indd 173 08-04-2025 12:53:25
Reprint 2026-27
